                          WASTELAND MAPPING PROJECT PHASE - V



WASTELANDS IN
BIKANER DISTRICT, RAJASTHAN




GHEESA LAL




                                ,



  ".3RII
  ICAR




D~VISION OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT
.CENTRAl ARID ZONE RESEARCH INSTITUTE (lCAR)
JODHPUR .. 342003
1999
                          WASTELAND MAPPING PROJECT PHASE - V




WASTELANDS IN
BIKANER DISTRICT, RAJASTHAN




GHEESA LAL




  1IJIi~
  ICAR




DIVISION OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT
CENTRAL ARID ZONE RESEARCH INSTITUTE (ICAR)
JODHPUR-342 003
1999
                    CONTRIBUTORS




PROJECT LEADER           BALAK RAM




ASSOCIATE               GHEESA LAL




TECHNICAL SUPPORT       A.R. MALAKAR
                        J.S. CHAUHAN
                        BAJRANG LAL PRAJAPATI
                        SUMER SINGH GEHLOT




CONSULTANT              SURENDRA SINGH
                                 FOREWORD


        The--   hoC ewiA:it e<myl-t"em; ~ iAAe.t-er\.t C01'l.ID-~ d«.e". to-
1M'l{r;u.t0W'cWW- cUwr.at'U/ condir~ ~ rr~ 1'laturc;U, veynu-~
13~ thet U+1pv~ ~O\4J'tt\; of ~ cuuL 'liN~ p~ula:t't.OY'v
rnwe- y"~ i-VIt ove¥-e1Lp1.oi,;t;v.r1.Or\; CLf"\.d, ~ ,of ~ at'\.d.- wctte¥-
Y"eynu-~   'fh.4.- ~ ~ ~ ~cuia.t'&.OrV M\d,- ~L{£cctt't.OY'v
pY"~ IWOY'de¥ to- ~e-~~rrOm!fw'ther ~etdat't.OY'v~pur
them; iN\! ~ pVod«c;t'lOW ~~ PVope¥" ~ CU'ld" rnapp~
w~     "T"he- CVV~ of ~ Y"~tCns ~~ at'\.d.- Vepet'tt"'We-
~datzv~GIS ~ hctr mcuie-~tliIMv very e.aw ~quidv
wi£h. ~ Ct(;CU.retcy.

       'f'he, CAZ'RI, ~ it¥ i.t'l.cepLIoOrV ~ bu.w ~ i-VIt ~~
~pV~ cMI.d.- rnapp~ of n.cttw"etL V~C%' a.t'ldt e.voW~ ~
for thei,r- ~ ~ 'f'he, VepGVtmetl.t' of sPC«;el, GOVe¥"nmet'\.t of
I~ Y~ thet cap~, ru:v.,.e- ikd'tfi,e<L CAZ'RI ~ at'\IlA'rqJ~
woy]c, ce.n.tYe- lM-'t.iL i-twolNed.- i-t'V 'thei..I'" pY'eu--~ pv0:f~ '/..ike,. w~
rnappi+1.ft, ~ COVe¥" rnapp~ GU'Idt I~~ M~ for
S~Ve.velopmet'lt' (IMSV). under· p~V of~pvOW~thet
~ofW~M~p~ofH~rva.ndt~~d4tYi.d}'we¥"e­
~to-CAZ'RI. Wetter~ ~UM'\f cuuL ~ciYf-{t ewe- mafOY'
pY'~ of the- 13~ d.4tYLct £M'\.d., fflhAK i-mpCMZ ~.\4- W ~LCtk
rhi,.:y L~ €M'UL ww.c}v ~ muiy ~ bu.w c;a..yV~ out" oY\; 1:50,000
~ ~ ~                      (vecWr)   dat'cv ha.-ve- be.erv cr~ IM'UieY GIS
etWi¥onm.et'\.t i-VIt   the- ~ of NaturaL Reww--~ In{oywu;t:t'1.Or\; Sy~
(N'RIS).

       It w hoped". tM..t (he,. daa;v ba-w... crea.md... i-VIt thet pY'Oject a.t'ld-
cUweA.opwt.et'\t" nu:hni.qUR4' ~ for Y~ of w~ wiUt
be... ~ for p~¥ £M'\.d., ~ .~¥ for th.eMr ~~
cUweA.opmet1t:




JODHPUR                                                               A.S. FARODA
May28,1999                                                                  Director
                                       PREFACE


         Wastelands constitute nearly 22.98 per cent of the total geographical area of our
country. In arid Rajasthan, abou~' 35 per cent area is occupied by such degraded and
desertified lands. This accounts for 9.7 per cent of country's total wastelands. For
rehabilitation and sustainable development, identification; mapping and characterisation of
wastelands is a pre-requisite. The widespectrum capability of Remote Sensing and GIS
technology had now made it possible to create uptodate natural resources spatial and non
spatial database accurately, efficiently as well as time and cost effective.

        Realising the need, the Department of Space, Govt. of India has, launched Wasteland
Mapping Project in the year 1986. . Under Phase-V of this programme it is planned to
complete wasteland mapping of 192 districts of the country. Present study is a part' of this
programme. It is an endeavour to carry out wasteland mapping of Bikaner district on 1:50,000
scale and creation of digital (vector) data base under GIS environment. The present status,
characteristics, spatial distribution and environmental impact of different categories of
wastelands are discussed. For rehabilitation and development of such degraded and
problematic lands suitable technologies have also been suggested.

        We are highly grateful to Dr. N.C. Gautam, Group Director, NRSA for gIvIng
opportunity to undertake this study. Dr. R. Nagaraja, Head, LUS and Dr. Ravishankar have
constantly monitored the progress of the project work and extended guidance for which we
are highly thankful. Dr. J.R. Sharma, Project Director and Head, RRSSC, Jodhpur deserve
our special thanks for sustained cooperation and for carrying out quality assessment of
thematic maps and GIS output.

       The Collector, Bikaner and other district officials have made available valuable
secondary data and suggestfons. Sincere. thanks are placed at"! record for their generous
help.

         Dr. A.S. Faroda, Director, CAZRI has taken keen interest and has been prime source
of encouragement and guidance for which we owe a debt of gratitude. We are extremely
grateful to Er. M.A. Khan (ex-Head) and Dr. I.C. Gupta (present Head) of Division of NRE for
providing all the facilities and to CP Cell for processing this project.

       The Divisional staff, Photography team, Drivers, Technical, Supporting and other staff
members have always helped and substantially contributed to complete the task in time. and
hence deserve our appreciation and thanks.




                                                                                BALAK RAM
                                                                               GHEESA LAL
 1.     INTRODUCTION
         The Wasteland Development Board, Government of India, recently felt
 the need to have an upto date information and maps of our country on
 wastelands, their statistics and their different wasteland categories on district
 level for development planning. For this purpose, the Department of Space
 (NRSA), Govt. of India was entrusted with this responsibility to complete the
 semi-detailed district level wasteland mapping using remotely sensed data on
 1:50,000 scale for the entire country. Under Phase V of this programme, the
wasteland mapping of 192 districts of the country is to be completed. The
wasteland mapping of Bikaner district of Rajasthan which is lying in the
region no.6 and basin no. D~(; and B and located in the agro-climatic zone
XIV of arid zone of western Rajasthan, has been done by Central Arid Zone
Research Institute, Jodhpur of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research.
The study was done with the help of geo-coded IRS LlSS II and III data of
January and October 1998 and Survey of 'India topographical maps on
1:50,000 scale supported with limited sample checking and available existing
resource inventories like land revenue records and forest data collected from
DFO Bikaner. The maps have been digitized, digital (vector) data base has
been created under GIS environment and final statistics have been
generated on CD, hard copy transparent film.
        Bikaner district. the north-western district of arid zone of Rajasthan
(falling in the zone of rainfall 300-180 mm and below) is characterised by
hostile climate, sandy and duny lands, meagre surface and groundwater
resources, poor carrying capacity of I~nd and low production. Under such
adverse situations the wasteland mapping based on IRS data will provide a
scientific approach for classification of wastelands and to know their status of
degradation and will generate valuable data on wastelands. The technologies
and preventive measures are also suggested for improvement, rehabilitation
and development of different categories of wastelands.



2.     STUDY AREA
        Bikaner district lies in the north-west of R.ajasthan in the heart of 'Thar'
desert. Th~ district in the west extends upto the international boundary with
Cholistan district of Pakistan and on the north, east and south, it is bounded
by district of Ganganagar, Churu, Nagaur, Jodhpur and Jaisalmer. "the
district is situated between the latitude 2r11' to 29°03' north and longitude
71°54' to 74°12' east comprising a total area of 27,244 sq km. The district is
covered with 60 SOl topographical sheets on 1:50,000 scale of which
effective coverage are 49 (Fig. 1 and Table 4). It accommodates about
12,11,140 (729998 rural and 481142 urban) people in its four tehsils
(6,42,555 male and 5,68,590 female) viz .. Bikaner, Nokha, Kolayat and
Lunkaransar which is 2.8 per cent of the state population with a density of
population 44 persons per sq km as per 1991 census. The urban population·
                                                                                          AP OF IIIAIII DIITRICT, RA~AITHA••
                                                                                           ICM.Ip • f . l' , If . If ' , , rIC... .
                                                                                                        , "




                                         {:~
                                         I      8
                                                                         ."OoeAL

                                     .
                      44 s !/' ···'·4.!...,....... . " 44!                  44iS
                                                                                D


                       /                             \.
                                                     ....
                                                            ",
             /
       l&!.r· ••
        ,6                 ...!!..
                             4
                                             44!.
                                                •
                                                       44~
                                                             : .'''' , , .. -'44-
                                                                              ""'tr"'1:

                                                                               "
                                                             "
                                                                                    I~" - ....,-1••.,-,~""
 2e-     I
. 0'




                                                .,
                                             4'.4.




                 0'                                                                                                      74 t         27
                                                                                                                                       o
                                                                     FIG. 1.
constitute 39.7 per cent concentrated in seven towns viz., Bikaner, Napasar,
Gangashahar, Deshnokh, Kolayat, Lunkaransar and Nokha while rural
population comprises 60.3 per cent lives in 580 inhabited villages in the
district while, 67 villages are uninhabited. The 86.8 per cent population is
based on agriculture while remaining 13.2 per cent people engaged in other
works likel government service, industries and other household industries.
Total livestock in the district as per 1992 livestock census are 25,31,365
which provides better opportunity to the people for their enhancement of
economic condition.


3.     GEOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION
         The western, south western, northern and north eastern part of the
district are largely covered with dunes of different types and magnitude with
flat to undulating interdunal plains. The central, eastern and southern parts
of the district constitute largely the flat and undulating aggraded alluvial
plains. There are no hills, and no rivulets or streams of any significance.
Small ephemeral streams flow in the vicinity of Kolayat and Gajner. Natural
inland depressions which retain some water during the summer are located
near Lunkaransar, Kolayat, Jamsar and Nal. The general elevation of the
district plain varies between 152 to 300 metres above mean sea level sloping
generally towards north-west. The sand dunes, range in height from 6 to 45
metres, suggesting the ribbed appearance of a seashore. Construction of
Indira Gandhi canal in its western parts had led to activation of the stable
dune field to a large extent. The migrating sand is, however, threatening the
canals and roads, besides spreading eastwards. At places salinity hazards
and undesirable rise of water table are also developing in the canal command
area.

3.1 CLIMATE
         Climate of the district ranges from arid in the east to extremely arid in
the west and is characterised by large extremes of temperature, erratic and
low rainfall with high evaporation. The mean annual rainfall of the district is
247 mm varying from 300 mm in the east to 180 mm in the west bordering
Pakistan. The bulk of rainfall occurs from June to September, maximum
occurring in the month of August. The usuaf onset of active monsoon is in
the month of July. The rainfall variability in the district from year to year is
high and standard deviation from normal annual exceeds 100 mm particularly
at all 'stations with coefficient of variability ranging from 50 to 65% for different
recording stations.
         Winter temperatures in the district are fairly low and there is a
probability of frost occurrence once in the three years and sometimes
temperature come down to _2° in the month of January.




                                                                                    2
        High temperatures in the district starts from April onward and May and
 June are the hottest months of the year. During this period, dry hot winds
 and dust storms occur frequently. From April to June temperatures exceed
40°C in most of the years arid in some years temperature above 4rC have
been recorded. The wind regime during the hot months is from the direction
of west and south-west
               I
                          and wind speeds increase from average of 6.5 km/h
in March to 13.5 km/h in June.
        With ~he, onset of monsoon in late June or early July, the day
temperature~ fall to 38°C in July to 36°C in August and September. The
diurnal variation in the temperature during the season is about 10°C. Wind
direction during monsoon is mainly from south westerly direction with mean
speeds decreasing from 12.8 km/h in July to 9.4 km/h in September with 24
to 28% as coefficient of variability.
            I




 3.2 GEOLOGY
         The district of Bikaner is a vast sandy tract. Three of its four tehsils,
 namely, Bikaner, Lunkaransar mostly, Nokha and part of Kolayat are covered
with sand. Rocks locally known as Magra are found in the south-western
portion of the district, which is part of Kolayat tehsil. In other parts of the
district, sand layer has been found while digging extensive and deep wells
upto a depth of 45 metres. In the hard or the Magra area, various types of
sand stone, clay and lime stone have been revealed at different levels. At a
depth of 32 m horizontal beds of various rocks belonging to the Eocene age
have been found which shows that this area was subjected to sedimentation
of sand stones for a pretty long time. Similar sedimentary formations of the
same age have been found in the south-western part of Pakistan also. The
geological formations of Eocene age are well represented in the
neighbourhood of Bikaner city. The strata consists of thick white and buff
lime stones and shales. Lignite and beds of fuller's earth occur in these
formations.

3.3 SOILS
        Soils of the district are predominantly light textured, weak structured
and well drained. Soil distribution in the district is related to landforms.
Moderately deep to very deep, loamy sands, sandy loam and loam soils
occur on the flat aggraded older alluvial plains and flat interdunal plains.
Deep to very deep, fine sandy to fine loamy sand occur, on the undulating
sandy aggraded older alluvial plains and undulating interdunal plains and
very deep fine sands on the dunes. All the soils are calcareous, amount of
calcium carbonate increases with depth merging at lower depths with lime
concretionary zone particularly in the flat aggraded older alluvial plains and
the flat interdunal plains. The arid climate in the district has resulted largely
in physica.1 weathering of parent material giving rise to more of coarse fraction
than fine clay material in the soils.


                                                                                 ,
                                                                                 -'
3.4 VEGETATION
         The vegetation of .. Bikaner district falls under the natural division of
deciduous forest. The trees and bushes which grow there are insufficient
even to fulfil the local requirements for construction of houses, making
agricultural implements and for fuel purposes. The most common tree found
 in the district is khejri (Prosopis cineraria). Other trees are: rohira (Tecomella
undulata), ber (Ziziphus jujube) and jal or pilu (Salvadora oleoides). Some
other trees found on embankments in the vicinity of tanks or in the gardens
are shisham (Dalbergia sisso~), ber (Ficus bengalensis), pipal (Ficus
religiosa) , siris (Albizzia lebbek), etc. ,Among the shrubs found in the region
mention may be made of aak (Calotropis procera), jhar beri (Ziziphus
nummularia),          phog      (Cal/igonum      polygonoides),      bui     (Aerva
pseudotomentosa), pala (Ziziphus rotundifolia) and ker (Capparis decidua)
while' in some scattered pockets hiloxlon is also available in sufficient
quantity. The grass community which is prevalent in the district are Lasiurus
sindicus~ Panicum turgidum and Cenchrus barbatus, etc. and are available
throughout the district. The saline depressions and saline interdunal areas
are dominated by halophytic scrub vegetation with Sporobolus marginatus-
Eleusine compressa as grass community.



4.     DATA USED
       The study of wasteland mapping was conducted with the help of geo-
coded IRS-USS-II and LlSS-1l1 False Colour Composite (FCC) data of
January 1998 and October 1998, Survey of India topographical maps of
1 :50,000 scale and supported with limited ground truth collection. Beside
this, available and existing resource inventories like Land Revenue Record
data which were collected from district headquarters and forest data collected
from DFO, Bikaner. Administrative boundaries like district, tehsil and village
boundaries, their village names and code numbers were incorporated from
the district census handbook of Bikaner district 1991. The major roads like
National Highway, State Highway and other important roads which are
connecting the medium to big size of villages are also taken from the district
road map from PWD. The Watershed Atlas of India was used for taking the
boundaries of region, basin, catchments and SUb-catchments and further mini
and micro watershed boundaries are delineated taking into account the
slope, elevation and local heights provided in the 501 topographical maps.
The final data and statistics generated through the GIS as per detailed
methodology given in Wasteland Manual prepared by NRSA.




                                                                                 -I
FLOW CHART FOR GENERATING DIGTAL DATA BASE FOR
WASTELANT USING VISUAL INTERPRETATION TECHNIQUES

      .-----------~---f.D:a~t:a~s:o~ur=c~c~----------------------,

                           Satellite Data
                           IRS LlSS -III


                         IVisulllinterprcllltlon ~ Olher            Transfer tho
                                                        Scason      village boundary
                                                         Datil      onto topa base
                                                        Available   on 1:50,000

                          IGround Verification ~~""""t------,J
                                    .




              FIG. 2         : Visual Methodology
· 5.   METHODOLOGY
           Wasteland mapping of Bikaner district was carried out by visual
  interpretation and GIS techniques as described in the Manual of Procedure
 for Preparation of Wasteland Digital Data Base using Remote Sensing and
  GIS Techniques (1997). False Colour Composite (FCC) on 1:50,000 scale
  made from IRS-LISS-li and LlSS-III, combined bands 2, 3 and 4 February
  1997, January 1998, October 1998, and SOl Topographical Maps on
  1:50,000 scales were uset;l as base material to prepare the toposheet wise
 wasteland maps for the year 1998. Study is more based on shape, size,
 tone, texture and pattern of the different wasteland categories. The spatial
 distrib!,Jtion and extent of each wasteland categories are shown in the maps
 and their area statistics generated through the GIS output. Bikaner district
 covering 49 effective coverage on 1:50,000 scale were prepared in four
 layers i.e. wasteland layer, base layer, administrative layer and watershed
 layer. Therefore, the final maps have the detailed wasteland informations.
The base details are taken from SOl topographical sheets and village
 boundaries from district census handbook of 1991 and codified. The region,
 basin and catchment boundaries were delineated and codified as per
Watershed Atlas of India. Based on terrain and heights micro and mini
watersheds were also delineated. The. ground truth information of query
points of all representing categories were recorded and field photographs
were also taken. The land revenue record data were also collected from
district headquarters, Bikaner.
          The data base including digitizing, editing, labelling, projection and
transformation, edge matching, overlaying and statistics generation,
boundaries of watersheds and their types and also provided the
administrative layer on 49 coverage through the ARCIINFO GIS system. The
flow chart for generating digital data base for wasteland mapping given in
Manual of Wasteland Mapping (1997) was followed in complete GIS system
(Fig. 2).



6.     CATEGORYWISE SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF
       WASTELANDS
        The statistics generated through the GIS reflects that largest area
among all the major wasteland categories has been mapped under sand
desertic (sandy waste) i.e. 10.01% followed by land with or without scrub,
degraded pastures/grazing land, under utilised/degraded forest land, gullied
land, waterlogged land, mining wasteland and land affected by salinity which
covers 8.23%, 2.47%, 0.29%, 0.27%, 0.13%, 0.05% and 0.01 % of the total
district area, respectively. The area under different wasteland categories are
given in Table 1,2 and Fig. 3.
   ,
 Distribution ot Wastelands in Bikaner District




                              0.24%
                                  1.25%


                                                            38.33%
46.65%




                                     11.50%




          o Gullied and/or ravinous land
          Ii] Upland with or without scrub

          IJ Waterlogged and marshy land
          o Land affected by salinity/alkalinity (inland)
          o Under utilised/degraded notified forest land
          o Degraded pastures/grazing land
          [] Sand-deserticlcoastal
          EJ Mining/industrial wasteland




                         Fig. 3
       The detailed wasteland statistics of the district for the year 1997-98 is
given in Table 2 and their spatial distribution has been shown on 49 coverage
of 1:50,000 scale attached with the report. Watershed-wise distribution of
wastelands is given in Table 3. Brief description of the wasteland categories
and their characteristics are as under.

6.1 GULLIED LANDS (Plate 1 and 2)
       This category of '"Yastelands covers 0.27% of the total geographical
and 2.16% of the total wastelands. It occurred mostly around Kolayat upland
and gravelly region where there are only a few small rock outcrops of
vindhyan sandstone of about 1-2 metres height in the region. Few local short
intermittent and ephemeral channels originated and have formed the gullies
in the north-east of Bithnok, north of Madhogarh and west of Kotri area. The
land has been incised by water into gullies of different depth and width. The
large areas around Mal, Gajner and Kolayat which is aggraded older alluvial
plain and eroded rocky and gravelly surface of Kolayat upland region and
have potential getting runoff into Kolayat and Gajner tank and in some
depressional areas where gullies are formed as a result of localised surface
runoff has affected the unconsolidated material resulting in the formation of
perceptible channels and caused undulating terrain. Around Kolayat and
Golri area at some places murram, fuller'S earth and soft white stones are
also mined which are locally used for making limestone and for house
building material. Vegetations are very sparse and occur along runnets and
pockets of soil accumulation. Prosopis ju/iflora, Acacia torti/is, Capparis
decidua, Ca/otropis procera, Tephrosia purpurea and Grewia tenax form the
sparse vegetation community. Grasses are very poor due to hard surface,
shallow soil and low rainfall.

6.2 LAND WITH OR WITHOUT SCRUB (Plate 3 and 4)             .
        This category of wastelands constitutes about 8.23% of the district and
38.33% of the total wasteland area. Without scrub part of this category is
more associated with upland, gravelly and shallow soil lands which are
devoid of vegetation. The lands with scrub have been mapped in hummocky
areas, sandy undulating terrain and in stabilised high dunes where density of
vegetation or scrub is high. Such type of lands occur near Kolayat towards
north of National Highway, north of Pitharon ki Dhani, around Nokhra, north
of Navagaon, south-west of Diyatra, north of Gura and south of Khari Chama
in a gravelly areas. Largest pocket of this category with scrub have been
delineated in west of Mahajan village around Meusar, Hindov, Kanolai, Buala
(covering 34 villages under firing range toposheet no. 44 H/5, 6, 9, 10 and
13) and other large and small scattered pockets in north-western part of the
district near Tarsula Toba, Kalewa Toba and along the Pakistan border near
Sasad Kund Bhagawala, north of Chhamb, south of Bithnok, Shekhawali ki
Dhani, south and east of Deli, east of Chhilan, Gulam Aliwala and around
Randhisar. Gravelly and shallow soil areas are mostly without scrub, dunes

                                                                              ()
and sandy undulating areas are having some vegetations and scrubs like
Capparis decidua, Crota/aria burhia, Ca/otropis procera, Calligonum
po/ygonoides,     Zizyphus     nummu/aria,   Acacia jacquemontii,       Aerva
pseudotomentosa, Leptadenia pyrotechnica, Cenchrus biflorus, Aristida
funiculata and Panicum turgidum are the common bushes and grasses. In
this category the grass cover is very poor, otherwise it can be better utilised
for grazing· purposes. Lo~ and erratic rainfall are the major constraints to
develop this land into grazing ,lands.

6.3 WATERLOGGED LAND (Plate 5 and 6)
        This category comprises of 0.13% of the total geographical and 0.61 %
area of the total wastelands of the district. Two large pockets have been
delineat~d and mapped along the main I.G. canal south of Gegra at 507 RD
and west of Amarpura at 750 RD. Besides, several small pockets of this
category occur along some canal distributaries i.e. south-east of Rawatwali
Dhani and east of Chhamb area. At RD 507 and RD 750 the excess water of
canal has been drained out through the weirs in interdunal and depressional
areas to just save the canal from damage by excess overflow water. But this
inunded water in interdunal and in depressional areas have created the
problem of water logging. These pockets have been easily delineated from
IRS data giving black tone in an irregular shape in interdunal areas. Due to
gypicious hard strata stagnated water from a long period has created a
problem of marshy land and salinity in fields of fringe areas and lowered the
crop productivity. In near future surrounding fields may be converted into
saline pockets. Before diverting the excess canal water in these interdunal
areas and in depressional areas, these were good cultivated fields in kharif
as well as in rabi seasons, but now these areas have been converted into
water logged areas which are wastelands. Due to constant standing water
several valuable trees and shrubs have been damaged and mainly
mesophytic and hydrophytic species consisting of Typha angustata, Imperata
cylindrical, Arundo donax and Saccharum spontaneum have come up.

 6.4 LAND AFFECTED BY SALINITY (Plate 7 and 8)
         This category of wastelands identified and mapped only in north of
 Lunkaransar and covers about 0.01 % of the geographical area and 0.07% of
the total wastelands of the district. It is easily identified on the imagery of
 LlSS-111 FCC of October 1998 giving in dark blue tone ih rainy season due to
 stagna~ed water. This is a natural saline depression. This land is located in a
 depression and unproductive and bare of vegetation and looks like a whitish
due to salinity in summer season. But some salt loving plants like Prosopis
julif/ora, Sa/vadora persica and Sporobo/us marginatus, E/eusina compressa
 and some unpalatable grasses come up in the rainy season. In dry season a
whitish crystal layers of salt is visible but salt extraction is uneconomic.
 6.5 UNDERUTILISED/DEGRADED NOTIFIED FOREST (Plate 9 and 10)
        Forest area in this district are deciduous and are highly in degraded
 condition because of erratic and low rainfall, extremes of temperature and
 high evaporation loss of moisture, converting the district into a typical arid
 tract. Hence, whatever plantations are done either dried up without water or
 has bee~ eaten by the animals. In this category only one area has been
 mapped. as a degraded notified forest i.e. BIR in between Udramsar,
 Surdhana, Godhwana ahd/Gharisar covering an area 0.29% of the district
 and 1.35% of the total wastelands of Bikaner. It is in highly degraded
 condition having very scattered trees and bushes like Prosopis cineraria,
Zizyphus jujube, Calotropis procera and scattered Capparis decidua are the
common trees and bushes.
      I Forest Department has undertaken various departmental programmes
and plantations have been done at several places like Nal, Gajner, Kolayat,
along th~ highway Bikaner to Mahajan village these areas are not included in
the notified forest. These are in highly degraded condition due to open
grazing having very scattered trees and bushes like Zizyphus jujube,
Prosopis cineraria, Calotropis procera and Capparis decidua are the common
trees and bushes. The plantations are done along the main canal and its
distributaries are flourishing well as a shelter belts but these areas have not
yet been included under notified forest, and hence area under notified forest
is very negligible.

6.6 DEGRADED PASTURES/GRAZING LANDS (Plate11 and 12)
       This category of wastelands comprises of 2.47% of the total
geographical and 11.50% of the total wastelands of the district. This
category of wastelands includes the permanent pastures, orans, agor, bir,
and land under tanks and nadis and roadside strip lands which are common
property resources under the direct control of village panchayat or
Government. Almost all the villages have the common grazing lands. The
village tanks/nadis also invariable exist in these grazing lands. Due to
constant and uncontrolled grazing and increaSing livestock pressure these
grazing lands are in highly degraded condition. Mostly this category has
been delineated and mapped around the settlements, tanks and temples in
the south-east part of the district having distinct boundaries and light red tone
of October imagery and at some places give light whitish tone on the IRS
data due to its degradation. The pressure of livestoek population is very high
and carrying capacity of this land is very low.
       These lands are distributed throughout the district in small to large in
size because every villages have some area under common pasture lands.
Large pockets of this category occur in villages like Deshnokh, Jailu, Hadda,
Akasar, Bholasar, Uditpur, Lakhansar, Bikanpur, Gariyala, Gura, Kolayat,
Khari-Charna, Girajsar, around Gangapura, north of Sevra, Kalu, Kalasar,
west of Bikaner city, Shobhasar, Jaimalsar, Karnisar, Sarunda, Napasar,
Himatsar and SW of Gangasahar. In rainy season only seasonal grasses

                                                                               s
come up in natural way and grazed in a short period. Removal" of plant cover
accelerated the process of soil erosion and siltation of water tanks.
        The herbaceous ground flora in the grazing lands is in extremely poor
condition and i~ represented by lower level successional species like
Eragrostis, Oropetium thomaeum, E/eusine compressa, Panicum turgidum,
Aristida funicu/ata,
           I
                     Crota/aria burhia associated with non-palatable thorny
species of Fagonia cretica, Corchorus depressus, Tephrosia purpurea,
Lepidagathis trainervis and E;uphorbia granu/ata, etc. The sparse and scanty
vegetation cover of these degraded grazing lands is not adequate to meet the
grazing demand of livestock population. Orans are in comparatively better
condition due to their religious sanctity, but these too do not have optimum
grass cover as there is no control on grazing of livestock. They are only
having the stands of trees and shrubs since their cutting is prohibited.

 6.7 SANDY AREA (DESERTIC) (Plate 13 and 14)
          Stabilised, semi-stabilised, dissected and active sand dunes 8 to 45 m
 height and undulating sandy plains with high hummocks and fence line ridges
 where cultivation is not possible have been classified and mapped under this
 category. It covers largest area amongst the wasteland categories i.e.
 10.01 % of the geographical area and 46.65% of the total wastelands of the
 district. Due to higher reflectance sand dunes and sandy hummock appear in
 light yellowish and sometimes light greenish tone on the IRS data. Most of
the lands are allotted and private property of farmers but due to low and
erratic rainfall and wind velocity in the region, these lands are not c.ultivated.
Moreover, high dunes in accessible for cultivation. Mostly, crest of the dunes
are devoid of vegetation and wind erosion/deposition is the dominant hazard.
Some vegetations have been observed on the low sloping side of windward
side and foot of the dune in leeward side. Large pockets of this category
have been mapped south of Khajewala, south of Rasubai, east of Deli, north
of Bhanipura, around Aangneu, around Sunesal and north of Chhilan, while
small to medium in size scattered pockets are distributed throughout the
district. Common vegetation on this category are Leptadenia pyratechnica,
Calligonum po/ygonoides, Acacia jacquemontii, Aerva pseudotomentosa,
Crata/aria burhia, Cenchrus biflorus, Aristida funicu/ata and Panicum
turgidum, etc. The density of Calligonum po/ygonoides is declining day by
day and this specie is endanger due to its large scale cutting by villagers for
fuel purpose.

6.8 MINING WASTELANDS (Plate15 and 16)
       This category of wastelands comprises 0.05% of the total geographical
area and 0.24% of the total wastelands of the district. This category is
associated with gypsum available under the shallow soil depth and earlier it
was under mining but at present it is out of use. This unit has been
delineated and mapped near Jamsar, south of Dhirera Railway Station and
east of Utamdesar, Bharu gypsum area in north of Badrasar and east of

                                                                                l)
 Kawani village. Earlier these pockets were rich in gypsum production but
 now this mineral is almost at finishing stage and pits and heap of residue
waste materials are turned upside down and vegetation cover completely
destroyed and mine spoils represent complete desertized sites in whitish tone
in degraded condition with shallow soil on the imagery in interdunal flat areas.
The Acacia tortilis, Aerva pseudotomentosa, Leptadenia pyratechnica,
Cenchr/;s biflorus, Aristida funicu/ata, Crata/aria burhia and Fagonia cretica
are the scattered and scallty plant species in degraded condition due its lost
fertility status in these pockets. Moreover, due to climatic an9 prevailing
edaphic constraints large to small mining muck heaps are devoid of any
biological activity. Actually the mining activity should start with a planning of
revegetation of the spoiled site/mining dumps and their subsequent
maintenance and management. In the past almost all the open mined areas
were: left to the mercy of nature. Low rainfall, high temperature and wind
speed in summer, low water holding capacity of soil, deep and
brackish/saline groundwater has further aggravated their degradation.


7.     RECOMMENDATION FOR WASTELAND RECLA-
       MATION AND MANAGEMENT
 7.1 GULLIED WASTELANDS
       These lands are located in gentle to moderate slope of Kolayat and
Gajner upland area. The land has been incised by the water into gullies of
different depth and width. For such lands, the control measures suggested
including gully plugging, stream training and providing suitable vegetation
cover to check the further degradation of these lands. For gully plugging
grasses like Cynodon dactylon and Desmostachya bipinnata, should be
gro~n on gully slopes and banks.      Trees like Acacia torti/is, A. senegal,
Acacia nilotica and shrubs suited to that area like Balanites aegyptiaca,
Prosopis juliflora and Zizyphus nummularia should be grown. Dead wood
and tings of trees may be erected at certain interval in gully to slow down of
running water. Such type of plantations in the gullied lands will check- the
further degradation of these areas and ultimately ameliorate local
environmental condition and provide fuelwood and timber resource to the
local people.

7.2 LAND WITH OR WITHOUT SCRUB
       The rocky/stony and gravelly upland occurs in the surrounding of
Kolayat, Gajner, Nal, Khari Charna, around Randhisar, Nokhra and Diyatra
area in eroded topography without scrub and in scattered pockets of this unit
in north-western part have been mapped with scrub. These lands are
recommended for fast growing trees and on the rocky gravelly uplands
shrubs and trees can be planted with the halfmoon terrace and/or in contour



                                                                               10
 trenches depending on the situation. The moisture conservation measure
 recommend for these lands are halfmoon terrace and contour trenching at the
 interval of 15 to 20 m depending upon the slope of the lands. The
 recommended energy plant species are Acacia bivenosa, Prosopis cineraria,
 Prosopis juliflora, Euphorbia caducifolia, Acacia tortilis, Eucalyptus, Acacia
 senega(, Zizyphus nummularia, Capparis decidua and Maytenus emarginata.
 The plqht species will check the further degradation of these lands and will
 provide fuelwood and top leaf for fodder. These type of energy plantation will
 ultimately ameliorate the 'local environmental condition and enrich the fuel
 wood ,and timber resource for the local people. It shall also save cowdung for
 the use as an organic manure.
        The areas of lands with scrub have been mapped in the north-western
 part of the district near Kundal, east of Beriyanwala, north of Khajuwala,
south of Bariya, west of Ranjeetpura, north of Pabni Toba, west of
Bhaguwala Toba and Ghulam Aliwala villages. These lands are associated
with semi-stabilised sand dunes, hummocky undulating plains, scattered
transverse dunes and sandy flat older alluvial plains with different types of
vegetative cover.        The sparse shrubs and grasses like Calligonum
po/ygonoides, Acacia jacquemontii, Leptadenia pyrotechnica, Aerva
pseudotomentosa, Ha/oxylon salicornicum, Ca/otropis procera, Zizyphus
nummularia and grasses like Lasiurus sindicus and Panicum turgidum are in
degraded state. Major constraints are very low rainfall, open grazing and
cutting of trees and shrubs for fuel purpose and high wind erosion/deposition.
Therefore, this category should be revegetated and rehabilitated with suitable
sturdy plants and grasses with soil moisture conservation measures and
brought into silvipasture system. The open grazing should be controlled and
tree and plant cutting should be prohibited. These should be developed in
rangelands so that fodder problem can be solved for the increasing pressure
of livestock in the region.

7.3 WATERLOGGED AREAS
         The excess water drained out through the weirs and seepage from
Indira Gandhi main canal system and its distributaries has created
waterlogging problem in parts of the command area. The most grazing
examples are at RD 507 and 750 and in some scattered pockets in the
district. These waterlogged areas are currently infested with obnoxious
weeds like Arundo donax, Saccharum spontaneulJ1, Typha angustata, etc.
and are without any use. If the weeds are removed and pisciculture is '
intrpduced the ecology of the waterlogged depressions may improve.
Moreover, these two major areas are located at RD 507 and 750 of main IG
canal and well connected with canal side road and good transport network.
Hence, these can be easily supplied to the available market in the state. This
pisciculture practices will give higher economic returns to the· state
government.



                                                                             II
         These areas need immediate remedial measures like dewatering of
ponded water, perforated PVC pipe line of drainage and reclamation of the
degraded land.       Suggested efficient delivery and on-farm utilisation of
irrigation water holds key to realise maximum benefit from the costly imported
water. Seepage from erected earthen bunds around the waterlogged areas
in cultivated fields should be checked through the masonry structures so that
agricuhural fields could be saved from rising salinity.

7.4 ~AND AFFECTED       ay   SALINITY
        In the natural salt affected lands near Lunkaransar it is highly saline
and are devoid of vegetation. However, the margins or fringe areas have
slightly less saline environment, where some salt tolerant bushes grow. Such
areas may be planted with shrubs like Prosopis pallida, Prosopis tamarugo,
PrQsopis chinensis and Atriplex sp. Which are fast growing and can withstand
high salinity. Other salt tolerant species like Tamarix diocia and Salvadora
oleoides may also be planted. These species have high value for fuelwood.

7.5 UNDERUTILISED/DEGRADED NOTIFIED FOREST LAND
    This category is in highly degraded condition and looks like a scrub forest
in the field. The tree species are very negligible except Prosopis cineraria
which is also available in scattered form. More dominant plant species are
Zizyphus jujube, Zizyphus nummularia, Capparis decidua, Calligonum
polygonoides, Leptadenia pyrotechnica and Aerva pseudotomentosa which
are not in the category of trees. Therefore, replantation should be initiated
with choosing the right species, planting of sturdy stocks in time and deep,
timely replacement of casualties and after care. Cutting and lopping should
be strictly prohibited with proper watch and ward. Presently fencing is broken
at several places and grazing is being done by the surrounding villagers.
Therefore, area needs fencing of barbed wire and grazing should be stopped
and replantation should be done with proper soil and water conservation
measures. Major plant species suitable for this land are Acacia senegal,
Prosopis cineraria, Capparis decidua, Ziziphus jujube, Parkinsonia oculeata,
Salva dora oleoides, Azadirachta indica, Grewiz tenax, Albizzia lebbeck,
Maytenus emarginata, Acacia torti/is and Tecomella undulata.

7.6 DEGRADED PASTURES/GRAZING LAND
        Village grazinglands and pastures ocyur in scattered pockets
throughout the district small to large in size in highly degraded condition and
often suffer from wind erosion/deposition. The browse resources have been
severely exploited, while the grazing resources are almost non-existent.
Such lands have been recommended for grass reseeding and tree/shrub
plantation. Depending on the occurrence these may have varied landform
a.nd soil types. Therefore, before adopting the recommendations site specific
situation should be kept in mind.



                                                                             12
         The main objective is to provide a palatable vegetation cover on these
  lands and regeneration of the degraded vegetation cover by providing
  suitable soil and moisture conservation measure and the protection. The
  approach should be ecologically suitable and acceptable to local people. The
  species suitable for grazing requirement and also as per requirement of the
 habitat are selected. Local vegetation surrounding the rehabilitation site can
 be taken as an indicator for selection of suitable species. Since most of the
 pastures/grazinglands/orans are associated with village tanks/nadis at their
 downslope end, the degradation and encroachment of these lands lead to
 more inflow of sediments in the tanks/nadis. Therefore, first of all it is
 necessary to provide fencing and plantation of Acacia torti/is around these
 lands for effective control of animals and then revegetation and rehabilitation
 should be done with the sturdy shrub and grass species. The high yielding
 perennial grasses like Lasiurus sindicus, Cenchrus ciliaris, Cenchrus
 setigerus and Panicum turgidum should be grown with the onset of monsoon.
 These species are more suitable for these lands and will provide nutritious
 fodder to the livestock of this region. After two years establishment of these
 grasses, the pasture land may be opened for deferred rotation grazing or only
 cutting of grass may be allowed for sustained forage production.
         The techniques of CAZRI given for the development of desert area
 should be adopted. Contour furrows, 60 cm wide and 25 cm deep are
 constructed in grasslands at a distance of 10-15 m apart, across the slope of
the land. In an another technique of inter-row water harvesting (IRWH)
system in which 30 cm wide ditch alternate legumes/shrubs are grown on the
edge of the ditch. The grass seeds are pelleted by mixing grass seed, clay,
FYM and sand in 1:30:5:5 in a pellet making device. Pellets of 0.5 cm
diameter are prepared and sown in the either in contour furrows or in IRWH
system. The seed rate varies from 2.5 to 7.5 kg/ha for direct seed sowing of
different types of grasses. For planting trees in the grazing land/oran lands
piting-discing technique should be followed. Unmanaged grazing should be
stopped for better forage production.
        The district falls in the zone of 150 to 300 mm rainfall where after 3
years of protection and controlled grazing the degraded conditions of
grasslands can be improved and their yield may be increased two to three
times. The yield of these grazing lands further can be increased significantly
after adopting soil and moisture conservation measures, reseeding and
proper silvipastoral management system. CAZf31 recommended that under
this rainfall zone trees P.cineraria, Zizyphus species, C.mopane, H.binata,
A.senegal and A.tortilis showed great adaptability with L.sindicus, C.ciliaris
and Cymbopogon grass species on marginal and submarginal lands and also
check the movement of sands towards the agricultural lands.

7.7 SANDY AREA (DESERTIC)
.      This category of wastelands sprawled over throughout the district
small to large in size of scattered pockets. These areas of dunes like crest,
    top and side flanks are bare and devoid of vegetation due" to high wind
    velocity, scanty rainfall, sandy soil texture with loose single grained structure,
    extreme variation of diurnal and annual temperatures, evaporative demand of
    the atmosphere and biotic interference have resulted into reactivation and
   wind erosion hazards. Wind erosion is doubly harmful as both areas, from
   where the I soil is removed and where it is deposited, lower the crop
   productivity. of the surrounding cultivated fields. Therefore, sandy waste in
   the form of sand dunes need/ immediate remedial measures like sand dune
   stabilisation practices. Sand dune control measure will not be successful
   until and unless it ensures stabilisation of the sandy landscape upwind of the
   dunes proper. Often the downwind nasal part of the dunes are considered
   for stabilisation, while the other parts are left to uncontrolled grazing and
   cultivation. Such practices also lead to failure of the control programme. It is,
. therefore, suggested that the sand dune stabilisation programme may be
   more wide-based, and include stabilisation of upwind plains by fixing barriers
   in parallel strips or in chessboard pattern using locally available shrubs, etc.
  to act as micro-wind breaks.
           CAZRI suggested that grasses and shrubs are most suitable for sand
  dune stabilisation, instead of trees in the arid region. Local available plant
  species may be given preference in the programme. In the north-western
  part L.sindicus, P.turgidum and E.compressa grasses, as well as
  Z.nummularia, Calligonum polygonoides, Haloxylon salicomicum, Acacia
 jacquemontii, Aerva pseudotomentosa and Leptadenia pyrotechnica shrubs
  are dominant, while in southern part L.sindicus, E.compressa, Crota/aria
  burhia, Aristida funiculata and Fagonia cretica grasses occur with
  L.pyrotechnica,      A.pseudotomentosa,         Z.nummularia,     C.decidua     and
  Calotropis procera shrubs. These and other local grasses and shrubs and
  Citrullus colocynthis creeper may be used for sand dune stabilisation, but
  controlled grazing of dune forests is of utmost importance.
           The most durable and economic approach to stabilise the active and
  fresh sand dunes is through the establishment of vegetative cover in which
 three major steps are: (i) protection from biotic interference, (ii) establishment
 of micro-wind breaks, and (iii) revegetation of sand dunes with strict watch
  and ward arrangements. Sand dune plantation forests have largely been
 justified on protective consideration; however, with increase in population,
 such plantations are considered an important source of woody biomass and
 fodder. Protection of dune forests from pests and disease is an important
 part of overall management.

7.8 MINING WASTELANDS
       In Bikaner district, the mining activity is carried out by opencast mining
method of the non-metallic minerals like gypsum, fuller's earth and white clay.
Out of these gypsum mining covers the largest part and this activity inflict
damaged the large area of land surface. In these opencast mining the
environmental degradation is evidently unavoidable. In mining process the


                                                                                    14
       x             nO,~O/OUMP                             X
 +
3m
                             }
                         SLOPE
                                       ---_
                                    5 0/0                       3m
                                                                  -t
 -t-
 3m
                                                                  -+-
 i-                      S LO PE ~ 0/0
                                                                3r- :
 5m                                                               ~m
                             r
 +     y
                           P LAN
                                                            Y     +-

                                  LoosE SURFACE
                                              COMPACTED




                  CROSS      SECTION-XV

MICRO-CATCH. WATER HARVESTING




               DETAILS                  X-SECTION

       HALF-MOON TERRACES

           x                                        X

           ~_~30R ~m~                                   h--~:
           F- ~                                         +-o-z",




           l----~-o----~-o-----o--~~~:
           y                                        y




                         CROSS   SECTION-~Y




RIDGE. P. FURROW WATEr? HI\fWESTING SYSTEM

                   - \ FiG.             4
lands have been turned upside down, the vegetation .cover completely
destroyed, fertility status of the area reached to zero level which caused total
loss of biomass. Therefore, rehabilitation of mined wastelands should be
taken up taking into account the characterisation of spoils and hydrological
features, etc. The productivity of rehabilitating site should either be equal to
or exceed that of pre-mining stage. The revegetating material should include
the produG'tive and protective plant cover of such species which are well
adapted to the terrain and climatic
                                 ,       conditions of the area. Hence in the
characterisation of vegetation, the neighbouring areas adjacent to mined site,
may be surveyed to evaluate the suitable species of trees, shrubs and
grasses, etc., which could be easily and successfully be grown on the mine
spoils.
        ''1 gypsum mined wastelands CAZRI recommended several trees,
shrubs and grasses which are most suitable for development of such areas in
arid lands with proper soil and water conservation measures. The trees like
Acacia toTtilis, A. senegal, Prosopis juliflora, Albizzia amara, P.cineraria,
Salvadora persica, Pithecellobium dulce and Tamarix aphylla, while the
shrubs are Parkinsonia acu/eata, Dichrostachys nutans, Cercidium floridum,
Colophospermum mopane,              Capparis decidua       and    grasses   like
Desmostachys bipinnata, Cenchrus ciliaris, Cymbopogon jwarancusa, etc.
These shrubs and trees can be planted with half moon terrace and/or in
contour trenches depending on the situation (Fig. 4).



8.     CONCLUSION
        The study of wasteland mapping reveals that about 584574 ha or
21.46% land is under different categories of wastelands and land with or
without scrub, pastures/grazing lands and sandy area (desertic) are sprawled
over throughout the district while gullied land, waterlogged, land affected by
salinity, degraded notified forest and mining wastelands are occurred in
limited pockets. Among all the wasteland categories, sandy waste covers the
largest land i.e. 10.01 % of the total geographical area of the district followed
by land with or without scrub (8.23%), degraded pastures (2.47%), degraded
notified forest (0.29%), gullied land (0.27%), waterlogged land (0.13%),
mining wasteland (0.05%) and land affected by salinity (0.01 %). All the
categories are under degraded state. Moderate to seyere wind erosion and
deposition, constantly increasing waterlogging and salinity, large scale
removal of natural vegetation and over utilisation of pastures are major
problems of the region. Therefore, for their development some measures
and technologies have also been suggested. Waterlogged areas near by
irrigated fields are further deteriorating the agricultural lands. Therefore, in
this ca.se further detailed study using high resolution remote sensing data is
required.



                                                                               15
                             REFERENCES
CAZRI, 1974. Report on Basic Resources of Bikaner District (Rajasthan).
Census of' India, 1991. District census handbook of Bikaner district
     (Raja'sthan ).
                           .-
Gheesa Lal, 1990. Report on landuse/land cover of Bikaner district (Raj.).
     CAZRI, Jodhpur.
Gupta, J.P. and Sharma, A.K. 1997. Agroforestry for Desertification Control in
      Arid Ecosystem. Desertification Control (Eds. Surendra Singh & Amal
      Kar).
Harsh, L.N. ang Tewari, J.C. 1997. Stabilisation of sand dunes and their
      management in Indian arid zone. Desertification Control (Eds.
      Surendra Singh & Amal Kar).
Joshi, D.C. and Dhir, R.P. 1997. Waterlogging and salinisation in Indian arid
       region. Desertification Control (Eds. Surendra Singh & Amal Kar).
NRSA, 1997. Manual of procedure for preparation of wastelands digital data
     base using remote sensing and GIS techniques.
NRSA, 1998. Wasteland manual, 75 steps for preparation of digital database.
Saxena, SS.K., Sharma, K.D. and Sharma, B.K. 1997. Rehabilitation of
     mined wastelands in Indian arid ecosystem. Desertification Control
     (Eds. Surendra Singh & Amal Kar).
Singh, K.C. and Sharma, S.K. 1997. Management of degraded grassland in
      the Indian arid ecosystem. Desertification Control (Eds. Surendra
      Singh & Amal Kar).




                                                                            16
Table 1. Distribution of wastelands in Bikarter district

Wasteland catkgories
            ,                      Total area     Per cent to     Per cent to total
                                         (ha)    total district     wasteland
                                                     area

1. Gullied and/or ravinous              7319         0.27              1.25
   land
-'
2. Upland with or without            224059          8.23            38.33
          , I

   scrub
3. Waterlogged and                      3588         0.13              0.61
   marshy land
4. Lana affec\ea by saY,n·,\yl            4\)5       '0.'0'"           ru:0(
   alkalinity (inland)
5. Under utilised/degraded              7884         0.29              1.35
   notified forest land
6. Degraded pastures/                  67238         2.47             11.50
   grazing land
7. Sand desertic                     272704         10.01             46.65
8. Mining/industrial                    1377         0.05              0.24
   wastelands

            Total                    584574         21.46           100.00
     Table 2 Toposheet-wise distrlbu.lion of wastelands in Bikaner district, Rajasthan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (Area in hectares)
L~posheet                                                     Gullied                       Upland                Water-              Land affe-               Under-                     Degraded                  Sands -               Mlning/         Total

f   ~o                                                        and!or
                                                              ravlnous
                                                                                            with or
                                                                                            )'>'Ithout
                                                                                                                  togged
                                                                                                                  and
                                                                                                                                      cted by
                                                                                                                                      salinlty/
                                                                                                                                                               utllised/
                                                                                                                                                               degraded
                                                                                                                                                                                          pasturesl
                                                                                                                                                                                          graZing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    deserticl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    coastal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Industrial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          waste-
                                                              land                          scrub                 marshy              alkallnlty-              notified                   land                                            lands
                                                                                                                  land                coastall                 forest land
                                                                                                                                      Inland
I
                  45 AJ1+2                                                                                                                                                                      682                     6765                               7447
                  45 AJ5                                                                                                                                                                        726                     3975                               4701

tI:'
    2.
    3             45 AJ6+7                                                                       245                                                                                           2283                       822                              3350
                  45 AJ9                                           248                           609                                                                                           3282                     3913                               8052
                  45 A/10                                                                       5214                                                                                           2443                       244                              7901
                  45 AJ13                                     4799                              5661                                                                                           4908                       588                            15956
l6.                                                                                             1588                                                                                           1334
 7.               45 A114                                                                                                                                                                                                979                               3901
    8.            45 A/15                                                                                                                                                                       447                      690                               1137
    9.            440/3                                                                       4012                                                                                              108                     7493                             11613
    10.           440/4                                                                         84                                                                                             1104                   30197                              31385
 11.              44D/6+5+2                                                                  14322                                                                                                                     4979                              19301
 12               440/7                                                                      11367                                                                                             1879                   14303                              27549
 13.              440/8                                                                       2216                                                                                              428                    9203                              11847
 14.              440/9                                                                       1607                                                                                                                       406                              2013
115.              440/10                                                                      6039                                                                                              22                    22438                              28499
 16               440/11                                                                       765                                                                                             414                    20159                              21338
1
 17..             440/12                                                                      4070                  375                                                                        549                    12050                              17044
 18.              440/14+13                                                                   1510                                                                                            1242                    23967                              26719
 19.              44 D/15                                                                     1540                1726                                                                         612                    19611                              23489
 20.              440116                                                                      5144                 572                                                                        2591                     8828                              17135
 21.              45 E/1                                      1790                            5105                                                                                            3007                     1023                              10925
    22.           45 E/2                                                                                                                                                                      3431                     1739                               5170
    23.           45 E/3                                                                                                                                          713                                                  3587                               4300
    24.          45 El5                                           401                                                                                            7171                         5363                       123                             13058
: 25.            45 El6                                                                                                                                                                       2636                     1135                               3771
.26.             45 E/7+8                                                                            54                                                                                       1691                     4758                               6503
    27.           45 E/9                                                                                                                                                                      1698                       447                              2145
28.               45 E/10                                                                                                                                                                     1052                     2778                               3830
29.               45 E/11                                                                                                                                                                                                156                                156
30.               45 E/13                                                                                                                                                                      510                       246                                756
 31.              45 E/14                                                                                                                                                                      338                     1706                               2064
:32.              44 H/1                                                                                            543                                                                         68                     2393                               3004
 33.              44 H/2                                                                                                                                                                       544                    11188                             11732
 34.              44 H/3                                                                      8629                                                                                            1705                    13990                             24324
 35.              44 H/4                                                                      8036                                                                                            2991                     5369               131           16527
 36.              44H/5+44G/8                                                                13627                  372                                                                        799                     3290                             18088
    37.           44 H/6                                                                     29530                                                                                            1343                     3025                             33898
 38.              44 H/7                                                                        24                                                                                            2768                     3981                90             6863
 39.              44 H/8                                                81                     730                                                                                            3113-                    2501               348             6773
 40.              44H/9+44G/12                                                               66006                                                                                              53                       103                            66162
 41.              44 H/10                                                                    22665                                        139                                                 1235                      412                             24451
 42.              44 H/11                                                                                                                 137                                                 1950                      241               808             3142 .
,43.              44 H/12                                                                                                                                                                     1063                      937                               2000
r 4
 45..
 46.
                  44H/13+44G/16
                  44 H/14
                                                                                                3660
                                                                                                                                          122
                                                                                                                                            7
                                                                                                                                                                                              1018
                                                                                                                                                                                              1008
                                                                                                                                                                                              1893
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         573
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1029
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1073
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5251
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2159
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2973
                  44 H/15+44U3
    ~7            44 Ll1                                                                                                                                                                       436                                                         436
    48            44 Ll2                                                                                                                                                                       445                                                         445
    49.         _39P/16+40M/13                                                                                                                                                                                       13291                              13291
    1'····'··
                  ................ ....... ............-......... -.
                                   ,                                                                ........... ......                      ........................................................... ..... _........
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ~              , ......... , .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    "


    !fotal2724400                                                                                                                        405                    7884                       67238 272704 1377                                           584574
                                                              7319                          224059 3588
 Pe .. _ ...... . .....                                                                                                                      ....................... .............
                                                                                                                                                                      ,                   .................. _
IPe..rcent"to total  area
              ..................                               0.27
                                                     •• u • • • • • • • . . . . . . • • •
                                                                                                8.22 0.13                               0.02                     0.29
                                                                                              ............•.. .., .. ....... ... _... ..................... .....................
                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                2.47 ............
                                                                                                                                                                                                               10.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -.......
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.05                         21.46
~wasleland                                                     1.25                           38.33 0.61                                0.07                     1.35                         11.50            46.65 0.24                              100.00
    Table 3. Watershed-wise distribution of wasteland

    S.No.               Watershed No.                                      Watershed                                   Wasteland                                Percent to total
                                                                             area                                        area                                     wasteland
     1.                  68 (ED)                                                     329515                                           29364                                5.02
     2.                   6'C (ED)                                                2189814                                          481288                              82.33
     3.                  602 A1                                                  ' 127934                                              52714                               9.02
    4.                    602A3                                                          27535                                            3432                             0.59
     5.                   6 C 00001                                                         5965                                          1566                             0.27
    6.                    6 C 00002                                                         2058                                              149                          0.03
     7.                  6 C 00003                                                          5681                                             648                          0.11
    8.                . 6 C 00004                                                           7574                                             770                          0.13
    9.                   6 C 00005                                                          4057                                          1583                            0.27
    10.                  6 C 00006                                                          2353                                             547                          0.09
    11.                  6 C 00007                                                          3197                                             740                          0.13
    12.                  6 C 00008a                                                            602                                           536                          0.09
    13.                  6 C 00008b                                                            779                                           194                          0.03
    14.                  6 C 00008e                                                            682                                           134                          0.02
    15.                  6 C 00008d                                                            678                                           376                          0.06
    16.                  6 C 00008e                                                            493                                           247                          0.04
    17.                  6 C 00008t                                                            932                                           812                          0.14
    18.                  6 C 00008g                                                         1416                                          1369                            0.23
    19.                  6 C 00009a                                                         1511                                             395                          0.07
   20.                   6 C 00009b                                                         1123                                          1055                            0.18
   21.                   6 C 0000ge                                                            910                                           825                          0.14
   22.                   6 C 00009d                                                            748                                           557                          0.10
   23.                   6 C 0000ge                                                        3420                                          2975                             0.51
   24.                   6 C 00009t                                                        2860                                              656                          0.11
   25.                  6 C 00009g                                                            722                                                   7                     0.00
   26.                  6     C     00009h                                                  1841                                          1635 _............................................................
..........................................................................................................._.............................................                 0.29
                       Total                                                 2724400                                        584574                                   100.00
Table 4. List of toposheets covered in Bikaner district, Rajasthan

S.No.     Toposheet No.                           S.No.    Toposheet No.
 1.       39 P/16                                 31.      44 H/11
 2.       40 M/13.,                               32.      44 H/12
 3.       44012 .                                 33.      44 H/13
4.        440/3                                   34.      44 H/14
 5.       440/4·                                  35.      44 H/15
6.        440/5                                   36.      44 L/1
7.        440/6                                   37.      44' L/2
8.        440/7                                   38.      44 L/3
9.        440/8                                   39       45 Al1
10.       440i9                                   40       45 Al2
11.       440/10                                  41.      45 Al5
12.       440/11                                  42.      45 Al6
13.       440/12                                  43.      45 Al7
14.       440/13                                  44.      45 Al9
15.       440/14                                  45.      45 Al10
16.       440/15                                  46.      45 Al13
17.       440/16                                  47.      45 Al14
18.       44G/8                                   48.      45 Al15
19.       44 G/12                                 49.      45 E/1
20.       44 G/16                                 50.      45 E/2
21.       44 H/1                                  51.      45 E/3
22.       44 H/2                                  52.      45 E/5
23.       44 H/3                                  53.      45 E/6
24.       44 H/4                                  54.      45 E/7
25.       44 H/5                                  55.      45 E/8
26.       44 H/6                                  56.      45 E/9
27.       44 HI?                                  57.      45 E/10
28.       44 H/8                                  58.      45 E/11
29.       44 H/9                                  59.      45 E/13
30.       44 H/10                                 60.      45 E/14
Plate 1. Part of IRS-LISS III FCC of December - Gullied land.




     Plate 2. Gullied land - South- t;ast ofGura village.
Plate 3. Part ofIRS-LISS III FCC of February - Land \vith or without scrub.




     PHue 4. Land with or ""ithoul scnJb - NE of Bcriyan\vala village.
Plate 5. Part o'fIRS-LISS III FCC of January - Waterlogged area.




PLate 6 . Waterlogged area at RD 750 - WC ~ ll r I.(j . In:iin calli.d .
Plate 1. Part ofIRS-LISS-III FCC of January - Land affected by salinity.




   Plate 8. Land affected by salinity - North ·of Lunkaransar village .
Plate 9. Part of IRS-LISS III Fe   of December - Degraded notified forest.
Plate ] 1. Part of IRS-LISS III December - Degraded pasture.
Plate 13. Part of TRS-LISS III of January - Desert ie sand.




      Plate 14 . 1) 'sc..:llic: salld - NlHlh ,)(.lndhasilr.
Plate 15. Part of IRS-LISS ill of Fcbnlary - Mining wasteland.




 Plate 16. Mining \\fastcland - South ofDhircra Rly. Stalion.
