URL: https://m.economictimes.com/nation-world/7-things-you-need-to-know-about-bikaner-land-deal/mahajan-firing-range/slideshow/52879481.cms
FETCHED_FROM: https://m.economictimes.com/nation-world/7-things-you-need-to-know-about-bikaner-land-deal/mahajan-firing-range/slideshow/52879481.cms
HTTP: 200
TITLE: 7 things you need to know about Bikaner land deal - The Economic Times
DATE: 2016-06-23
AUTHOR: BCCL
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-25

Rajasthan government had in January last year cancelled the mutation (transfer of land) of 374.44 hectares of land, after the land department claimed to have found that the allotments were made in the names of "illegal private persons".
2/7
Skylight connection
Notice has been issued to the firm Ms Skylight Hospitality by ED, whose directors are Robert Vadra and his mother Maureen Vadra, under the provisions of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA).
The Enforcement Directorate had conducted extensive searches in this case in Rajasthan and other places last month and had claimed to have seized a number of documents.
The probe is related to the purchase of 275 bigha land allegedly by the company in the Kolayat area of the border town of Bikaner.
The central probe agency had registered a criminal case of money laundering in this case last year on the basis of FIRs filed by the state police after the local tehsildar had made a complaint.
4/7
State of denial
While filing the case, ED had also taken cognizance of reports that had referred to a firm allegedly linked to Mr Vadra which had purchased some of these Bikaner located lands.
Mr Vadra has denied any wrongdoing even as Congress party called the action "sheer political vendetta".
5/7
Mahajan Firing Range
According to Bikaner administration sources, the 374.44 hectares of land was illegally allotted or possessed in 2006-7 by some villagers, who were "wrongfully" shown as farmers displaced by Mahajan Field Firing Range [in pic] of the Army.
6/7
Wrongful acquisition
The farmers who were actually displaced by the setup of firing range [in pic] were allotted land between 1992 and 1996, sources have said.
7/7
Chain of wrongdoers
It was alleged that Vadra's company also purchased chunks of land.
But Vadra's company is 3rd or 4th party to purchase the land.
As of now, first party to purchase the land has been arrested and investigation is still ongoing