URL: https://rahulghai.blogspot.com/2015/12/ignp-canal-in-rajasthan-experiences-of.html
FETCHED_FROM: https://rahulghai.blogspot.com/2015/12/ignp-canal-in-rajasthan-experiences-of.html
HTTP: 200
TITLE: IGNP Canal in Rajasthan: Experiences of People
DATE: 2015-12-03
AUTHOR: Rahul Ghai
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-25

The Indira
Gandhi Canal Pariyojna (IGNP) initially known as the Rajasthan Canal Project
(RCP) is one of the most significant projects of the modern state in the desert
in Rajasthan.  It is one of the biggest canal
networks in the world serving one of the least populated and most inhospitable
regions. Though covering only 10-15% of the arid area of the       Thar it has been accorded prime importance
and is the largest ‘public investment’ by the post-colonial developmental State
in the state of Rajasthan having fed on liberal loans by the World Bank and the
Japanese government. The IGNP has multiple objectives like “...provision of
water for drinking, irrigation and industrial use; develop the vast land
resources, settlement of the thinly populated areas; drought proofing; checking
the spread of desertification and improvement of the eco-system; and overall
development of the area through creation of infrastructure for exploitation of
natural resources...”. 
The IGNP was conceived in 1948 by the genius
Rai Bahadur Kanwar Sain, the then Chief Engineer of the Bikaner 
State  who thought it was feasible to
‘irrigate untold millions of acres in the Rajputana desert from the Punjab  rivers’. Ideologically propped up by Jawaharlal
Nehru as the 'kingpin' of State planning for developing the desert, the IGNP
was started with generous loans from the World Bank and a favourable policy
framework enabled by the Indus Water Treaty of 1960 between Indian and Pakistan
under the watchful gaze of the World Bank. More than 3,200 million rupees have
been spent on the canal network till 2008. The main components that have been
accomplished till now are the 445 km long lined canal running parallel to the
Indo-Pak  border, nine branches, seven lift
schemes and twenty-one direct distributaries apart from 8187 km. of minor canal
network. The state claims to have opened more than 9.5 lakh hectares of area
for irrigation. Another 2 lakh hectares is being planned to be opened for
irrigation in the Barmer district. Apart from this the IGNP provides drinking
water to all the major towns and cities of the western Rajasthan, and more than
3500 villages and settlements in the command area as well as outside it. IGNP
is a gigantic settlement and irrigation project that is supposed to benefit
more than 2 million people.  
Thar and IGNP Stage II
The 256 km long
main canal in Stage II starts near Sattasar, (km 189) in Bikaner district and
extends all the way to Mohangarh (km 445) in Jaisalmer district. It can be said
that in Stage II the interaction between the three meta processes of
colonisation and allotment of land; construction of the canal network and
development of the command area; and irrigating the command area, that together
constitute the basic structure of the IGNP, reached a level of complexity that
is not to be seen in Stage I. All through its flow area the canal passes
through highly undulating terrain of high and medium sized sand dunes, many of
which are shifting, covering regions in Pugal and Kolayat (Bikaner district)
and Nachna, Mohangarh, Ramgarh, Jaisalmer (Jaisalmer district) covering an area
of 5 lakh ha (CCA). Additional area (2 lakh ha CCA) under Gadra Road 
The coming of
the IGNP in these arid and hyper arid regions ushered in processes of radical
transformation. For the communities as well as the state the scale and scope of
changes entailed has been unprecedented. No other single development project
has had so significant an impact on the workings of the state, the destinies of
the communities and the fragile ecology of these regions as the IGNP in the
last thirty years. 
The narratives
of the experiences of survival by plebeian settlers offer a different
perspective to the ‘greening of the desert’ than the dominant narratives from
the top about this mega initiative of ‘making the desert bloom’. These
panegyrics, zealously proclaimed from the corridors of power, ivory tower
pedestals of politicians, technocrats and canal elites, invoke metaphors of equating
Indira Gandhi Canal akin to Saraswati, the mythical river of abundance.
Applauding it as the supreme feat of technology and human ingenuity, as the
hallmark of modern progress and development in the inhospitable Thar desert has
been the dominant narrative of ‘modern development’ in Thar.  
In sharp
contrast to these eulogising epithets, the narratives of existence of plebeian
settlers reveal quite a different story about these staggering costs and
awesome labyrinthine hydraulic spectacle that IGNP has inscribed on the face of
the Thar. The canal in transforming the desert that it thought was ‘waste’ has
created its own miseries and in fact has not only done irreversible harm to the
fragile ecology of the area but has introduced structural inequalities and laid
the conditions for a new order of exploitation. What is really tragic is the ‘waste’
that the canal has wrought upon commons, pastures, rangelands, their bio
diversity, traditional dry land farming practices combined with intricate use
of rain water harvesting structures, and so on. 
The coming of the IGNP can be seen as initiating processes that mark a
decisive break with the pre modern customary sanctions and practices. The canal
command area created by this hydraulic network has set in processes of
reshaping the distinct natural resource regimes of the Thar by demarcating and
dividing them indiscriminately into slices of private  agricultural land holdings (6.2 hac. each).
In doing this, it would not be an exaggeration to say that the IGNP has
tampered with the essential integrity of the fragile ecological base of the
Thar. It has not only restructured the physical landscape but has put in
place a set of attitudes and ambitions which bear a sharp
contrast to older way of life in Thar. 
Never has the rhetoric of productivity
of land and indeed man as a productive and individuated unit governed the
popular psyche so much before in the Thar where communities have long survived
through shared communal traditions and have been known for celebrating what is
rustic and elemental in life venerating nature as sacred. As many settlers
sagaciously point out increasing desertification is not the nightmare; it is
the increasing laying waste and rapacious plunder of nature orchestrated by the
sway of private capital and maximising greed brought by the canal that is.
But this is not
really an ‘ecological critique’ of the canal or a mournful lament at the loss
of the pristine desert or counter sloganeering against big canals etc. The
ensuing narratives are firmly embedded in the experience of engagement of
people with the massive edifice of the canal in this harsh terrain as they
battle their lives toiling hard in the changed landscape of the desert.  The ecological sensibility that we wish to recover
from the dusty layers of Thar and the intricate network of canals, small and
big, is constituted of the experience of the travails of people in the material
history of everyday life in the canal command area. This diverse world of the
settlers is constituted by both the old natives, those who have come from other
parts of Rajasthan as well as the wealthy farmers from the northern state of Punjab . Among them are landless agricultural labour often
belonging to low caste, women who toil in the agricultural fields and are
dextrous embroiderers as well, erstwhile nomadic pastoralists as well as those
who stubbornly continue to be semi nomadic pastoralists against all odds,
sedentary husbandsman who has made a successful transition to stall feeding of
a few milch animals and sells milk to the dairy, new farmers who have
successfully lived up to the ‘individualist-frontierist’ ethic of colonising
the perilous desert, poor allotees who could not save their land due to paucity
of resources, allotees who have been rehabilitated after being displaced from
their generations old ancestral villages because of war or the coming of a
firing range, traditional elders as well as PRI / Chak Samiti representative, young
teachers who are eager to be seen as more ‘cultured’ than the ordinary mortals,
a range of casual workers from the ranks of labouring poor, etc. 
The voices of
these different kind of settlers are not 'individual feelings' alone. This
polyphony of voices has its own share of rustic reckonings, existential
ramblings, joyous expressions of success and represents an echoing of the
perceptions and values of a much larger community in telling about the tenacious
moral economy of the desert natives helping us understand the story of the
peculiar ‘green revolution’ by this desert canal from below. These testimonies
while recounting the daunting perseverance of the settlers point to the
miserable travesty this piped dream of making the desert bloom has been
smothered to, a chimera that continues to produce and reproduce its own
mirages.