URL: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/rajasthan-reclaims-land-said-to-be-robert-vadras/articleshow/45747010.cms
FETCHED_FROM: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/rajasthan-reclaims-land-said-to-be-robert-vadras/articleshow/45747010.cms
HTTP: 200
TITLE: Rajasthan reclaims land said to be Robert Vadra’s | India News - Times of India
DATE: 2015-01-04
AUTHOR: L K Chhajer
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-25

- News
- India News
- Rajasthan reclaims land said to be Robert Vadra’s
Trending
This story is from January 4, 2015
The Rajasthan government has taken possession of around 360 hectare land in Bikaner’s Kolayat region after cancelling mutations (transfer of ownership).
Sources said a part of the reclaimed land — around 74.85 hectare — belonged to a company Congress chief Sonia Gandhi’s son-in-law, Robert Vadra, owned.
“We cancelled the mutations as the land was found to be wrongfully allotted to private people,” Kolayat’s subdivisional magistrate (SDM) Rann Singh told TOI on Saturday.
Singh said he did not know whether a part of the land belonged to Vadra’s companies. “Investigations are still on,” the SDM said.
READ ALSO: I-T department sends notice to Robert Vadra's firm
Bikaner collector Arti Dogra could not be reached for a comment despite repeated attempts.
From right: Congress president Sonia Gandhi, Priyanka Gandhi, Robert Vadra and Rahul Gandhi.
Sources said Vadra’s company, Skylight Hospitality, had bought 74.85 hectare land in Golary, Indo-ka-Bala and Madh villages of Kolayat tehsil in 2010.
The company later sold it apparently when the land deals got controversial.
According to the Bikaner district administration, the 360 hectare land was illegally allotted in 2006-07 to some villagers, who were wrongfully shown as farmers displaced by the Mahajan Field Firing Range of the Army.
READ ALSO: Robert Vadra shuts down 6 companies in Haryana, Rajasthan
Sources said the farmers, who were actually displaced, had been allotted land between 1992 and 1996.
From left: Rahul Gandhi, Rovert Vadra and Priyanka Gandhi.
It was detected in 2010, but then Congress government failed to take action. Then Kolayat tehsildar Gajendra Singh Nain had filed 15 FIRs at the Gajner and the Kolayat police stations against 16 farmers and some revenue officials.
“We are investigating how the farmers managed to show themselves as displaced people and got the land allotted,” the SDM added.
Read this story in Hindi: राजस्थान सरकार ने रद्द किया वाड्रा को बेची गई जमीन का सौदा
End of Article
FOLLOW US ON SOCIAL MEDIA