CE~S~S,

RAJASTHAN

1951

AND

AJ~ER

DISTRICT CENSUS HANDBOOK

BIKANER
PART I-GENERAL DESCRiPTION AND CEWSUS TABLES

By

Pt. YAMUNA LAl... l)ASHORA~ B.A.~ LL.B.,
Superintendent of Census Operations~
Rajasthan and Ajmer.

JODHPUR.;
P.R.INTED

AT

THE

GOVERNMENT

1956

PRICE

Rs.

PRESS

PREFACE
The Census Reports in olden times were printed one for the whole Province of Raj.
putana and another for Ajmer-Merwara. Some of the ~Frincipal ~tates now merged in Rajasthan
published their own reports. This time the State Census Reports have been published in the
following volumf"s: .1. Part

I

A

2. l>art

1-- B

~ubsidiary

:l. Part

L -- U

Appendices.

4. Part IL-A

Report.
Tables and District Index of

Non-Agricultural Occupations.

('enera} Population Tables, Household and Age Sample Tables, Social
and Cultural Tables, Table E Summary T igures by Administrative lTnits.
an<l Local 'KA' Tnfu'mities.

5. Part II--B .. Economic TableR.
They contain statistics down to the district level,
The idea of preparing the District Census Handboo'{: separately for each district was
put forward by Shri R. A. U-opalaswami. 1. C\ S., Registrar General, India, and ex-officio
Census ('ommissioner of India. as part of a plan intended to secure an effective method of
preserving the Cf'IlS11R records prepart:>d for areas below the district level. He proposed that
all the district census tables and census abstracts prepared during tho process of sorting and
compilation should be bound together in ::t single manuscript volume, called the District Census
Handbook. and suggested to the State Governments that the Handbook (with or without
the addition of other useful informat.ion relating to the district) should be printed and published at their own cost in the Harne manner 'as t,he-, villag@ .J:5ta;tiKti9s in the past. In aocepting. this sl1~gestion, the Governnwnt of I-taja:s-th-aR -'\':leoid.ed, t.o' print, and publish the more
important portion of statistical data relating to ·the- district -and to preserve the reRt of the
records in H, manuscript volume for any futurE" use.-~to· "\vhich the:v may be put.
<

This Handbook contains five Ueneral Population Tables of A Series, three Ecollonlie
Tables of B Series fi e Household and Age Tables of U Series, seven Social and Cultural TableR
of 0 :.:.!eries, one table r,~ givjng Kummary for the district and tehsils, a local table 'KA' showing
infinnities by a e groups anll an Index of ~on-agricultu]'al Occupations. Each table contains
an explanatory note necessnry for the proper understanding of the figures. The nurnberl'l
given to the table.~ in this Handboo corr{'spond to those given in 8tate Census Reports.
Village I irectories were published for tho first time in I P3l by a few States of l~aj­
putana. The exam.p1e was followed by all the States in '941. They contained for each village
the populatbn figures by religion and also t orne other useful information. 'They were bound
in a volume one for each :-itate. 'Phis time the Village ] }irectories are also incorporeted
in this Handboo 1z under the name of "Pl'iInary '-'ensus Abstract and Village Directory"
which ~how the basic popuintioll figllrps Reparately for 8a('h \'i1Ia~e or town-ward classified
by livelihood classC'R instparl of rpligion and also some information of general nature.
Opportunit.y has bcpn t.aJ';_PlL to put in a short introductor5~ note detailing the salient
pointi5 connected with the distl'l['t, sueh as the physical features. climate, rainfall, irrigation
and drainage facilities, roads and other communicatiollf~, agriculture education, indu .... tries [nd
other matters of general interest. The information contained in the introductory note is
IHlsecl on the material furnished b~T ("ollcr'tors of cliRtl'icts and Departments of Government.

In addition t.o the above some fi,gures of general int,erest and arrev-iew of population
hf'0n inr·(ll'porat('rl.
-

f'i"-!1lT'P'" llHn~ al~o

Tho fwheduled dat,e 101' the pubLication of the Handbooks as prescribed by the Registrar <1eneral, India was
"Not later than March 1952" but practical experience showed its
publication hy that time all impracticability. Even the compilation of the tables together
with its final touch could not be cOlupleted by that time. r_rhen came the qnestion of printing
which proved to be a huge task. There 25 districts in Rajasthan and 1 in Ajmer. The
t,ota 1 n umhp-r of printen pagp.~ tnrnen, out, to he neaTly 9,000. The Government Presses were

already over-burdened with the printillg work of other departmellts and in the l'rintiIlg
of Census Publications priority was given to Central Government Publications i. e. the
State Census Reports. The rebult was that till March? 1954;o for 14 out of 26 districts the
P. C. A. and Village Directory could not be printed especially because the press had no stock
of small type which was essential for their printlDg. It was, therefoTe decided to publish
tht-'l Handbooks in two volumes l'art T" consists of Introduction, h· brief review of population
figures and;
1. General Population Tables (A-I to A -- V),
'2. Economic Tables (B-1 to B-III),

3. Hf1usehold and Age (Sample) Tables (C-1 to C-V),

.
4. Social and Cultural Tables (D-I to J)-VII),
5. E-Sumluury figures hy Adm.inistrative

l-llits.

6. Local Table . KA' Infirmities, and
7. District 1ndex of

Non-~\gricultural

(JccupationR.

Part II contains only Pr:in~ary ('ensus Abstract and Village

~·irectory.

The Handbooks of the Ajn,er Sirohi and Jhala~yar Dist;ricts are however being published
one volume, because they have been completed h:~l this time.
4

In

While every care has heen taken to ensure tlle correctn~ss of figures and yillage
names, certain mista~~es lI ight have crept in. I shall be grateful if thcy are br<Y ght to
my notice.
j

Y. L. Vashora

LIST OF CONTENTS
Particulars

S . .Y f).
L

Introduction

I-XXIX

R'_lYiew of Popula-tion J5'igures
.-,.,

Distriut Cen'3HS Dat:l> n,t a Glauae, 1951

8

9-10
11-13

A-General Population Tables.\-

I.

1-7

RdceIne of C'~nsu8 Tables

Definiti'JIls and Key to Symbols

I').

Pages

I.

Al'L'a, HOllses and Population

16

~\_- II.

VariC1tioll in Population during Fifty Years

15

A-Ill.

Towns and Villages Cla.'4sified by Population

16-17

A -IV.

'l_'owns Chssified by Population with v.ariation f-IDeO 1901..

18-19

A-

Town"> arranged Torritol'iaHy with Population by Livelihood Clas;:;es ..

V.

20

B -Ecunomic Table8-

21-23
B

"

~

Livvlihood Cb.sr-;eH and Bub-Classes

24-25

B - II.

SC:00ndary U1_O,),US of Livelihood

26-39

B ---III.

EmpJoyo;_'s, Employees and IudepcllHlent Workers in Inun;..;tl'ieQ <IIld Servi('C'M by
Divi8ioDR and Sub-divisions

40-62

n -Hausehold and Age (Sample) 'l'ablesC-

!J.

1.

T.

Household (Size and Cornposition)

c - II.

Livelihood Classes by Age Groups ..

64-67

C--IIL

Age and Civil Condltion

68-69

c - IV.

Age and Literacy

70-71

c -- y.

Single Year Age Returns

72-75

D -Social and CuJtu~'al TabZe8-

D- 1.

(i)

Moth'3l' Tongue

76

(ii)

Bilingualism

77

Religion

78

D -III.

Scheduled Castes ~nd Scheduled Tl·ihes

78

V - IV.

Migra.nts

79

D - V.

(ii)

D-VI.

Non-Indian Nationals

81

D-vn.

Educational Standards

82-83

D-

I I.

Displaced person" by Livelihood Chl,sses

11).

E --Sumrn lry Figures by Admini.strative unit"

84-86

11.

Locct.l (~) Infirmities

87-89

I e)

District Index of Non-Agricultural Oocnpa.tions

91-103

~.

BIKANER DISTRICT.
INTRODUCTION.

I. Physical Aspects.
Bikaner district is situated in the south-west of the Bikaner Division. On the formation
of Rajasthan, the
territory of the former Bikaner State
was
1. Position
declared to be a
division with the headquarters of the Divisional
Commissioner at Bikaner. The present district of Bikaner has been
made out of the four tehsils of Bikaner, Lunkaransar, Nokha and Kolayat ( Magra ) of the former
Bikaner State. The district lies between tl1P parallolR 27 0 15' and 29° 5" north latitude and 72°
20' and 74° 20' ea&t longitude. Bikaner city which is built upon a rock formation is higher
than the surrounding sandy tract. The height of the city is 736 feet above sea level.
The area of the district according to the calculations of the Surveyor General for India
is 8,446.6 square miles but according to the Director of Land Recordl:l
2. Area
for Rajasthan it is 10,150 sq. miles. The greatest length from north to
E'outh is 144 miles and the greatest breadth from cast to west is 114
miles.
The district is

3. Boundaries

bounded on the north by the Ganganagar district. on the west by Pakistan and J aisalmor district, on the east by the Churu district and on
the south-cast and sout,h by the Jodhpur and Nagaur districts. The
Indo-Pakistan border on the ,\-yest of the distriot extends for nearly 37

miles.
The distriot derives its name from its prinoipal city Bikaner. This city was founded in
1488 A. D. by Rao Bikaji, the founder of the Bikaner State.
4. Meaning of Name
The general aspect of the district is a vast sandy plain interspersed with sand-dunes
and sand~hins.
Most of the sand-dunes are found in the west
5. (:qnliguration
of Bikaner tehsil, and rorth of Lunkaransar tehsil. Only a few of
these sand-dunes are moving; most of them are fairly stabi-'
lized with trees and shrubs already growing on them. The heights of these sand-dunes vary fromfive feet to a hundred feet. Forest does not exist. South of the Bikaner City th,ere is
a considera.ble tract covered with brush-wood. This when all green, during and after rains
gives i(he impression of a growing and young forest. This is called "Jorbir". The w~ole of
this ~ndy tract, however, turns immediately after rains into a beauitful vast greon tract, covered
with the richest and nlOst sucoulent grasses making the district one- of the best pasture lands.
in th;e:country. The area under tehsil Kolayat ( Magra ) is different. "Magra" in the local
dialect nwans hard. The soil of this tehsil is level, firm, and somewhat stony, but fairly productive,
under good rainfall. This tehsil is in the south-west of the district. The general elevation of the'
district varies from 400 to 1,200 feet above the sea level.
,

The city of Bikaner itself is built upon a rock formation running south-west to
north-east, which is ;many miles in length and foul' Iniles in breadth. It is considerably higher
than thf\ surrounding heavy sand-tract and is composed of sand stO'lf'.
It is for this reason that·
whi~e ~pproaching Bikaner one can see the eity from a good distance) unless the sight JS
obstructed by sand-dunes.
There are no hills in the district.

6. Hill System
There are no perennial or semi. perennial rivers originating in or passing through the
district. With the present average rainfall ranging from 5" to 10"
7. River System
there is practically no surface run -off. There are, however, a few Ioeal
n'ullahs in which the little run-off from hard surface finds its way. Some
of these nullahs have been impounded in tanks for irrigation and drinking purposes; others get
lost in the sand after flowing a short distanoe. Most of the nullahs in Magra area have been impounded fOl" the above purposes as they have reasonable flow in an year of good rainfall.' .

II

Most of the important lakes and tanks of the district are situated in the Magra. area.
Th:; und€rmentioned are the important ones of them:-

8. Lakes and Tanks

(i) G rjner Lake:- There is an artificial lake at Gajn0r, about 20 miles from Bikaner. The
height of the bund js 25 feet and i, h 1S a cap,l.city of 50 m.c. fe ,t of wat r. The catchment
arC'a of this lake is about 50 sq. mibs
nd ii" feJ by a lo:;al E'tre3.m. There al'e two ct,.:xttri8 and a
palaU 1Jl building belonging to His Highne~s the Maparaja of Bikaner at its shore. The water is
used only for drinking l""ud bathing purpose~ and is not put to any irrigation purposes.
(ii) l{olay t,t T (nk: Kolayat CY'.' ai ,s the hcadqw'vrters of the l{,nlaYco,t (l\Iagra) tehsil. There is
t.ar.l.k in a long d"pr')s'3i6n the wat)r edge of w:lich is 2 mlI,n long. DJpth of water when the
:tank is full is 20 L}c!; and it has n. cap:1city of 10:) m.c. fDt 0 ':" wate. The catchment area is
labout 75 sq. mil0!] and the t"nk is fed by local str3:1m:. TIn wa.tor is used principally for
bathing and drinldng purpOS03 PJnd is als0 brought by rail to B'k:tncr for beinz used in the
Electrical Power Houso st,_'am-boil0rs. tho woll w"l,tor of Bikan:n' city not being good for them.
There are good g '. t,? 20nd lllany t~mpl(J3 ["t its shoroB.
-A,

, (i i) Gxngsarow,;w T tnk:-It is another t'),nk in I~o'a-~;',' (Magra) tehsil. It is an artificial lake
(J't}nstruct0d durin-=; tt10 l"3ig,'l of M I.hq,:::aj"o G ',n-;;3. Sj_~l.ihji and th:w0by deriving its nam~ from
its rubr. It is 6) un ft. long and th0 h0ight of t~l" bund ie; 3:) f,):)t. It has a W '.t( r h()~ding capacity
of 94 m.c. foet, n,Tith a catchm,'mt area of 30.70 sq. miles. Thoro is a small rest house
and a palace lnlonging to th0 M'Lharajn. of Di~m lOr at its shor~s. Th':) water of this
t-',nk is used for TI'rig["ti;l1 purposes and irrh:?;ating '-'('I:'J 'Iy 873 bigh_:::,s. This is situated near Jagucr
village, 11 miles nort:l-wesr of GpJjuor. When it is full an aro')' of 444 acres come
under its
wators. The bund is kutc~~(l.
(i v-) Bund No. 1 :--It is another artificiallako constructed in l(, ~1'~ Ycl,t (Magra) tehsil, during the
reign of Maharaj8, Gang \ Singhji. It is 5.170 ft. lon~ with its bund 25 ft. high. Its w',ter holding
capacjty is 50'56 lll.C. ft. and catchment area of 30 sq. miles. It is fed by a local stream and
irrigat?s an area of 300 bigha.s. It is situat'3d nr;rtr t;allkalan vilhgo abo-.lt 15 miles west of
Gajncr. When this bund is full the total area of land under water is 635 acras.

(v) Mandal Tank:-This artificial lake was also CO:::lstruct'Jd drrring the reign of Maharaja.
Ganga. Singhji and is 9,100 fC2't long. Th0 bund iR 20 feet high and the capacity is 61'23 m.c. ft.
of wat t'. The catchnlOnt arna is 16 sq. miles. It is fcd by a local Rtroam and it irrigates an area
of 500 bighas. It is situat:}d n~ar M3.nd'l.l villa. 6 0 33 mile;:; from OJ,jner. When full, tho total
area of land undel' W,),t~r is 493 bighas.
Other small tanks of the district are:-

- ('d) Mudh B~tnd:-T~ is situated no:'!,r Mudh village 10 miles west of Gajner. It Wag
construct'Jd for utilising surface run off of M tdh va,lby for irrig).tio'1. It has boen lying bri~'),ched
for many y~ars and is n,ot intended to be re;:;t')red aq its b"ld is sP')'''.gv a"'1.d r:an ,ot hoH the colleoted
wat0r for long. When the bund USGd to br; full t 1'l0 t,tal arc:J., of hnd submerged used to be
92 acres. Its cat",~lmcnt area is 374 sq, miles. Tho bund wa,s 1 ut ·ha.
(vij) Bund No.2 - I is situatC}d ne"1r S'1,nk-th'1. viHag,'1 a',o'l,"', 15 miles w~st of Gaju'3r and
constructed in t-h" euly yo-ars of this c"lntury fo1" utili8in~ th"." ll,)'.:l";lO,)TI flow of local n.ullah<; in the
vicinity. When fnll, it submerges 134 acrE'S of land and has a catchment area of 2'50 sq. lniles.
Its w.).t'3r is utilis'3d for irrigation.

'(viii) Bund No . .1 - 1 t is situlJ,ted -~ e'l," hund No. 2.
Wh~Tt full
it submerges 114 acre~ of
land ""TId has a catchmont area. of 3 sq. miles and a c"p3-city of 7'78 m.c. ft. of '\Vat,e-:". Tho bl.md is
k'tfcha and the w,ct0r is utilised for irrigation.
(ix) Bund No. 4.-It is also situat d nea~ h"ud No.2 and 3 above. When full, it submerges
345 e,cros of land an.} has a cat·,hment aroa of 2 sq. miles and a capacity of 38'43 m.~. ft. of W'31ter.
(x) Dadar Tank;-It is situated near Gudah village - 'Vhell full ;t sub-merges an area of
230 aores. It irrig;l,tes an area of 100 acres. The catchment area is 590 sq. miles and it
has a capaoity of 12'30 m.c. ft. nf wn:-er.
(Xi) Sailia ta'l1..k:-It; is situ.ated h~ar- ~Grtdn,h vilhg7 15 '0 20 miles west Qf Gajner.
The
wato' 'h "lding capq,(lity of this bund is 13'50 m. '. ft.· c'Lt')h"ll-mt area is 4-50 ,sq. miles; it irrig,artfm
area of 50 a. -.:., Fl - and When full, submerges :an area of 1,8?, .a1)'I"O~.

an

Khudi Tank.-It if? aJ.so situa..ted nea.r Gudah village, 15 to 20 :miles Wttet of'
Tho c~pacity of this tank is 5'30 ~.c. ft. of wa-t..lr, and. the catchment area. is 1·50~.

(x:H)

Qa.juor.
miles.

It irrigates an area of 25 a'.:res and when full, submerges an a-roa of 56 a.9reli.

(xiii} JhinjhiniJ/u Tank.-It is sitJlated near Beethnoke~ 21 miles west of Gajner. ':fh"
capacity of this tank is 13'80 m.'~. ft. cf W.lt r and the ca.tchment area. 4 sq. miles. It irrigartefJ
u.n aYoa of 50 a :res aud when full, submerge-s an area of 170 acres.
(xi v) K iniya Tank.-It is situated near Kiniya Ba5t~·. 30 miles west of Gajner.
The
water holding e~ ,paci',y pf (his tank is 14'11 lli. '. ft., a:.] I i the c.atchment area 10 sq. miles. It

irrigates an area of 70 a/'res and when full,
(xv)

subnlCrges

Bhatia Tank.-It is situate:! near

an area of ] 66 acres.

Bhatia.

villago, 36 miles from Gajner. Tho
catchment ar.)a of 3 sq. miles. It
irrigates an area of:!5 auros and whon full subm.erges an area of 115 acres.

wat,::,·r ho}di),g capacity of this tank is (3 m. " ft. and it ha.s a

Bikaner district is a vast plain blank.,tt ,d with s.1.nd, a part of the graat "Thar" desert.
o t of the four t~hsils ( f t~lO district, th.re3, V 'z. Bik~n?r, Lunkaransar
9, Geology
and Nokha are t~lUS S3,ud cov _JL'Jd. In th9 nouth- '·'"e.stern portion of
tho distriet, howcJv0.·, rv(;ks £:'1',) fJuni in their natural exposures as
well as tho earth soctions rovea.led in. tho sha,fb of wolls. Th3 OJ,!ih-w0stern ro:;ky portion of the
di"!trict falls undor tho K.oiaya (M~~gra) te:-,sil. In. othor <),1'03. than that of tho rocky area of the
soutb-wost, the sand layer is vcry thick. At p)aco3 'ho wells have rove.'l.lod th"',"', i'he sand is upto
a depth of 150 foot. II... the Magra or tho har.l area. of the di.Jtrict well-scctions have revealed
various types of sJ.ud stO:::lOfl, clays, and lim }-ston )s. Fur about 20 nlibs can be seen horizontal
beds of various rocks lying ono 0,01' the other in a distinct manner. Tbeoo rocks are of Eoc~:Q.e
Ago and bolohg to the N ummulyt,ic limestcne series.
Dr. Moore, in one of his reports, has stat-;d: "Tho geological characteristics and water may be
oonsidcred togother. Wat3r at Bikaner is only obtainable thre::> or four hundred feet from the
surface. I inveatigated tIle material brought up from a wdl whor.3 the water had first boen ()btained at the depth of 316 feet. This well wag wit~lin the city walls at the south-west extremity.
The strata paBs-1d through were first, a mass of k In~'u, thon a mass of multani-mctti, thirdly,
sand stone, and lastly white gritty sand or gra.v,")l, the latter con'3isting of white stones form th~
size of a pen, to that of an ogg, compos3d of qu:.trt?:: alt'l.Ough not round, as to give rise to the
idea that they must at some time have been expose.l to the action. of running water. Cart~r, the
geologist, has expressed tho opinion that the whole of this scmi-d")s3rt portion of Western India
did at some tim') fOrIn the bed of an ocea'::l eX':andi:1g frJffi t:1.0 present s~or03 of the sea to the
lino of Arravali 'ange; and the geological ch!l,racteristics shown to exist by the d')ep weIls of
Bikaner would seem to support this opinion. 0:1 this point I m"loy observe that I found an unmistakeable fossil sbell nlark on a ston") of the wall of old for!; built by Bikaji.
Although no
companjnIl mp,rks were seen in other ston:)s ox l.,min")d, yo::;, a mor;) minute and scientific search
than I could afford would probably provo S110C333fu1."
It is now believed that this area wa<:; 01.':\"1 a la!l-i 8·l1'f1.'.]") of th"} Vindhyan s'}ries. It was
thf'n encroa.ched by sea in the E,)c 'no Ago anrl W:LS 1:lUbj ")ct') I to s!dime~t--.,tion of sand st0nes for
a long time. From the evidonco of tho occur' nco of Bedim ,utry roclm of tho S1.me age in the
Punj[!.b it is beli }ved that they wore deposit'1d in tr..e S::1m') 1'1'a as the P"os")ut one3. Probably a
long gulf had ono:) c;)vered tho whole a.rea rni then gr.:tdually reaedocl t·.) south or t~,"\vard!'l
south-west.
south.

The econonlic minerals which are found. a.ro confined ID'l,inly t'J
They arE' described as below:-

the snlall areas in the

(i) Full'l"!'r's Ea"t}\:-It is found in thick l-e 1"l 1"l t'1.0 Kol . at (M~gra) tehsil and als(") in Palana..
It is QMoeiated with sand stones and lim", R'J')n0S ann bolona' to t'1e Nu-nluulvtic lima stone
series. It is of very good quality and is avaT',b10 in vory larg~ quan itips.
~
(11. Gla,J/t-A number of beds of greyjs'l whito -cl~y a~e found exposod in the oroo.l"-6M- 'Of th", K ,hyat; (Magra) tehsil.
Thr:y are bC}li0vco. to be suitable for manufacture of
potteries. They aro available in a very L''-1'7~ quantity ::tnd baing quit'_) near the surfaoe.
cost of extraction will bo very little.

<h!d

(uj) Glall~-8an-1:-0f the s<l.nd stOllAS 1'I.v ...,;if'.hl6 in th~ ar0as Bome arc very white and are
suitabl& [or m'l.nufacture of glass. Thes~ 0CC'lT as p-"tch'1f3 in tho sa-nd stone beds. They
have boon found in the Magra area. and a,ls~ n,)'1.r Bikane:r city.

(iv) Gypsum:-lt is found in large quantities at Jamsar and
also in
the' villageir'
Bharru, Koni, Jamalsar, etc. It ocours in varying thiokness of a few feet to 40 ft.,' beloW'
a soil covering of 3 ft. The quality of Gypsum found at Jamsar is very fine.
(v) Bauxite:-It has been found in different wells sections in the village Mudh in the'
Kolayat (Magra) tehsiL ~wo typ~8, one Ferry-gin?uS and the othe: white variety has been
found. The latter has a hIgh alumma content and IS actually a baUXite clay. It may be suitable
for the manufacture of potteries.
(vi) Red Oxide:-Thin layers of this are found within the sand stones in the Kolayat
(Magra) tehsil. When crushed they show brilliant red colour and may bo suitable for making
paints.
(vii) Lime-stone:-Impure lime stone is found practically everywhere in this district as
kankar. A pure variety of yellowish colour is found near the fuller's earth, quarries at Mudh
and Palana. These are generally used for lime burning. A massive variety of kankar is found
near Darhari, which is suitable for manufacture of portland cement.
(viii) Quartz: -Pebbles
south of Bikaner city.
There

is

of white quartz are found strewn on
These quartz can be used in potteries.

the

ground

surface on the'

nothing

in the district approaching a forest or even of a good sized "Yood.
The vegetation commonly found in the country's desert plains,
10. Botany
occurs here. Trees and bushes can be seen hero and there singly
or in clumps, not in sufficient quantity even to supply the local
requirements for agricultural purposes and fuel. Dried up cattle dung and roots of pho(j
bushes along with twigs form the bulk of the fuel. With moderately good rain the district'
becomes rich in grasses and fodder.
To afford protection to trees on the formation of Rajasthan, "The Rajasthan Removal"
of Trees (Regulation) Ordinance, 1949" was brought into force with effect from 21st June, 1949.
This ordinance covers trees both on occupied as well as unoccupied lands and makes removal'
of trees in an unauthorised manner punishable with a fine which may extend upto Rs. 100/- (ormore in subsequent offences) per tree.
( i)

Trees
The follOWing trees are common in the district:

S. No. Local Name
1. Bair
2. Jal
3. Khair
4. Khejri
5. Bavalia
6. Rohira
7. Vilayti KikaI'
8. Neem
9. Tali or Sheeshull1.
10. Keekar
11. Bar
12. Peepal
13. Imli
14. Neem Chameli
15. Siris

OommonName
Bair
Peelu
Catha
Khejra
Babul
Rohlra
Musket Beams
Neem
Sheeshum
Acacia
Banyan
Pipal
Embicc:.
Indian Cork tree

Scientific Name.
Zizyphns juju ba.
Salvadora oleoides.
Acacia catechu.
Prosopis spicigera~
Acacia ara bica.
Tecoma undulata.
Prosopis juliflora.
Azadirachta indica.
Dalbergia sissu.
Acacia aratrica.
Ficus bangalansis.
Ficus religiosa.
Tamal'in dus indica.'
Mellingtonia hortensis.·
Albizzia lebbek.

The best timber wood out of these trees is that of rohl:ra, (Tecoma undu1ata )'
but unfortunately this tree is not. very common. Trees mentioned from No.9 to 15 are also not·
very common and can be seen on embankments, in the vicinity of tanks or in gardens only. '
The moqt common tree in the district is khejri, (Prosopis spicigeI'8J) the pods, l~aves
and bark of which are eaten by the cattle and in times of famine ('ven by the pnople. The wood
of this tree is of a very inferior quality; insects attack it almost immediately after it is, o'!t
and its boards become half dust in a few months. It is said that if burried in dung or sunk m '

v
salt-water for a few days, the wood becomes fairly durable. The tree has a certain sanctity owing
to its figuring in the history of Ramchandra and it is worshipped on the Dusserah day. In a
number of villages it will also be noticed that the platform of the village diety is under a khejra tree.
(ii) B'U8hes:
Bushes and other miscellaneous woods found in the district:--

S. No. Local Name

1.

Aak

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Phog
Bui
Sajji
Lana
Pala
Karel
Thor

OommonName

Scientific Name

(i) Pride of the desert
(ii) Milk plant

Calotropis proc ra.
Calligonum polygonoides.
Ae~·uR. tomentos~.

Salsola griffithii.
Haloxylon Salicornicum.
Zizyph us rotundifolia.
Capparis ~phyna
(i) Euphorbia neriifo1ia.
(ii) Euphorbia royleana.

The Aak bush flourishes extraordinarily well in the district. Some of these have br en
noticed to acquire the size equal to t he height of trees. An Ank bush situated fairly close to the
road near Nal village has been noticed to have gone higher than the electrical pole beside it and
the pole was about 18 fe-et. The fibre of the cotton that comes out of its porls is the strongest known.
Its leaves are eaten by goats and are believed to have medicinal properties. Phog bushes are very
common all over the district; its roots and twigs are used for supporting sides of wells and
supply material for huts. The buds are eaten in the villages with butterInilk. The leaves.
are eaten by came-Is. L'tnrt and s7j,ii are valuable plants growing in firmer soil. Considerable quantities of soda are manufactured from these plants. The soda of the latter plant
is inferior in quality to the former. These are found mostly in Pugal area. When burnt they
yield an impure carbonate of soda, used in washing and dyeing cloth. Kair berries a1'6 very~
commonly used for pickels.
(iii) Common grasses:
.
In the years of good or even fair rainfall, the countryside be~ome"l one of the best
grazing grounds in the district. Altogether a bout 28 kinds of grasses are found. _

Bhurut grass: (C. nch-rus catharticus) is a very valuable one, it supplies good fodder for the
cattle and its seed, gathered at no cost by the poor, save their labour, serves the purpose of
grain. But alas! "its prickly husks lame dogs, are the torment of travellers and add appreciately.
to the discomforts of a residence in Bikaner." It can be preserved for long. Other grasses>
the seeds of which are stored. by the poor to serve as a standby in years of scarcity are:Damrtn (Penni~1el;um c~n<:hroirl "~-), Nakra, Gantl}a and
Phuler, the seed of '?huler' is
called 'Pk"li.<:h' and the common belief is that it can be digested by the human stomach only,
when it is taken with 'gh()_e' or 'rhhachh'. The common belief about '(laman' grass is that it is
good for cattle breeding. "GantI/,'/T' derives its name from_ its top knot or 'Gr{1?th' and is a low
fine grass. It is commonly believed that this grass is good for production of both wool and
'ghee'.
Other grasses and annuals used as fodder are:8awan (Eleusine fIagellif(;ra), a rather - tall and fine grass believed to be excellent.
for sheep and one that can be preserved for long after it has dried up. Dachar-is a good grass·
which can b3 pres':)rved, t~(,YJ'"bp, !c'trl:' karad. ghora m.nth. cha·fl"g. hooT-raten by cattle only,
mxnrlusi, m'trath by cattle only. baru. dar or dais\, bekar, 8'as Dllakro. Kanti, Dageroeaten by cam~ls, Ka"rtris-eaten by camels only, Rame<;-eat,en by call1cls only, Chhrrpri-by
camels only, al·"'t-i, qoda gamt~<;. 8in'twari~ hilars and unrjar punrhlu. Dabh (Eeragrosis cynosuriodes) is a hard grac;;s wit·h little sap. it has deop strong roots and it is very difficult'to·
eradicate.

Bikaner district

.11. Fauna

in common with a major portion of western Rajasthan differs considerably in its fauna with the rest of India. ~ India as. a whole falls in
the Z 'o-geographical division of the' earth known as the Orie:rr~~l
·region but -the fauna of this district resembles· more with t1J_~.f!- 9f-

VI

the south-west Asia and north Africa, which area, according to Zoological division, 'belongs t.o th&
Palac&"rctic region.
The district being in the desert zone has very little water to have much fish life and that 'IUa._Y .betaken as nil. As reg 1, 'ds the rap tile class, the sn :,kes and liz'trds are found in consiaeralHp
number.
Local people on being asked about the snakes of the district give the undermentioned
names and descriptions of them. The task of working out their common names and scientific names still remains to be done.
Be~ides, the Inen of sciencp have ample fi'cld to investig~<.te
into the life and stories of these snakes.
'" Bandi" is described to be a snake one and a half feet in length of a polish grey colour
with dark spots. It is believed to be poisonous and is reputed to make a small jump to strike its
prey. Tho length of the jump, it is reputed to take, varies from a mere spot to 'camel lJigh'.
"Painda" or 4~ Pivna" is described to be a pale coloured snake especially found in Pugal
area. It is commonly believed that it does not strike at its prey with its fangs as the other
snakes do, but poisons its prey while it is asleep by administering poison through its breath. The
length of this snake is believed to be about 8 or 9 inches.
"Sanlth Ohur" is described to be about
believed to be poisonous.

3 feet

long with

shell

like

makings.

It is

"Tolia Sarp" is described as a brown (colour of oil) snake, about 3 feet long. It is believed
to be less poisonous than the "sank!?' ch,ur"
"Padrlm Srrrp" is a very thin snake. from 12
impression on its hood. It is grey likp earth in colour.

to

18

inches long with a

hoof like

"Khurava Srtrp" is described to be a dirty white coloured snake, 5 to 6 feet long with
a thin tail with as much poison as a rat has in its bite.
"Ohital 8nr.r"
lieved to be poisonous.

is

described

to be a yellow coloured snake, 3 to 4 feet long.

It is .be-

"Sarprotia 8arp" is believed to be a non-poisonous snake, com.LTIonly seen on trees,
the favourite being the "jal' tree. It is described to be a foot long of dirty white colour.
An outstanding characteristic of the birds of the zone is that they are paler in colour than
their own brethren in the eastern districts of Rai8sth ,n. Imperial Sand Grous~ '( Pt.uroCl{}s
orientalis) are or.;.ly winter visitors.
They arrive about the third week of October and
lea.ve by the end of February. Gajner is one of the finest places throughout the dis~ri:t for
Imperial Sand Grouse shoot. In 1929, it was estimated that some 1,00,000 of these 'birds
had collected at Gajner. The heighest number of these birds shot at Gajner one morning
is 5,600. Late Maharaja S1dul Singhji of Bikaner holds the individual record of having· shot
915 birds in one morning.
p

Another bird of interest which visits the district in winter is the Rosy Poster
(P;:fstor res~us). The special interest about this bird is that it is one of 'the greatost agents
for. destroying locusts. They go in very large numbers wherever the locusts go and feed thems3lves
ana their young ones exclusively, if possible, on locusts alone.
To see the "neel-kanth"
(Coracias bengalensis) on any day and especially on
the" DU88f-:rah" day is regarded as a good omen. But every keen observer would note 'tha.t this
locally resident bird commonly known as the Blue Jay or the Indian roller does not have a Hne~l_
kt;tnth" (blue~throat) but has an unmistakable brown throat.
Birds ,'an be
divided
into
four categories (i) birds that
are useful fro:rn
the point of view of agricultural economy; (ii) birds that are harmful; (iii) birds that are netttra'l'
or about whiCh sufficient is not known from that aspect and (iv) game birds.

Vfi

I. Residen-tial and winter-visiting bi'rlls 'Useful to agrieu-zture
A caterpinar eats twice its own weight in leaves per day. Certain larvae consume within
24 hours 200 times their original weight. Locusts are as notorions for their -prot--,fic reproduction
as _for their prodigious appetite. Birds play a very important part- in keeping down the iUsocts, '
caterpillars, etc. because a large portion of normal food of birds consists of these insects, etc. A pair
of common myno,8 have been observed to bring food
(cater-pillars, grass~hopper, locusts, etc.) 323,
times in one day. A pair of Indian-robins were observed (in an adjoining state not in this district)
to bring food to its young ones, 264 times. Thus the birds play p, magnifi ont role in Jeelping
tile mankind to keep these ba'ruful jnsee ts end lo~:psts dow~~.
Owls, haWks. -sh,kras and other birds of prey are generally regarded by the oommon pre~
valent opinion as birds of bad ornen,and looked down upon as if they were all enemies of every
thing that is good. B,'t these 'birds of pray' are amongst the most important of nature's
checks upon rats and mice. The damage thes", roients do to the crops and agricultural products is
enormous. It is worked Gut near about 10~/o of the total produce in som;} years. It has been
estimated that one pair of house rats, having 6 litters of 8 young annually, and breeding when
3! months old, would increase to 880 in one year an(l in five years to 940, 369, 969, 152 rats ?
Similarly, some birds do extremely valuable work, work which i'jOnle municipalities and
good citizens neglect to do. Although men. science, and politics have advanced in this district
in common with others yet it is no secret to say that very little improvement has been made in
the district and plenty
of thinD'S
ha.ve been left for these humbl~r creatures to do. The vultures
v
C>
are the greatest sea vangers in the district
both in
numbers and the amount
of
work. Kites and crows also share hands in scavanging and are useful from that point of view.
But all their acts are not motivated simply by their desire for food; they will steal away
glittering spoons; they will tease a dog, dig up freshly planted seeds. The good, they ,do is
thus easily set off by the mischief they play, so, at best the crow may be regarded as of
neutral value. Th follOWing are th~ mest <'omm0n birds useful tc agricultnre:0

Common Ba.bhler (Argya caudata), Yellow Eyed Babbler ( Chrysomma sinensis 1. White
cheeked Bulbul" Pppncha" (Molpastes leucotis). Red vented Bulbul "B,ulbuZ" (Molpastas caffer),
Great Grey Shrike "Sug'ln- c~iri" (Lanius excubitor), Bay-backed shrike "H-ug'7. n-ckiri "
(Lanius vittatus) King-crow (Dicrurus m'tcrocerctls). Tailor Bird
"Pl;"Zki" (Orthotomus
sutorius) Golden Oriole (Oriolns oriolus ) Common Mynah "G1-"u r sali" (Acridotheres tristis\, Bank
Mynah "G'bur8ali" (Acridotheres cinginiauusJ- Blue .Jay "Neel K-zntl?," (Doracius benghalensis),
White breasted kingfisher (Halcyon Rmyrnensis), Spotted owlet "K~ch'1,'I"i", Barn owL Rosy Pastor, Common. stlJ.I'ling. Pied Bush ch·-t (Saxi<:ola ('aprata), Brown Rock chat (Cerocrnela Fusca),
Hoopoe '-Khaf,i-c 1!'1:ra", Yellow wag tail (Motacilla plaria). White wag tail (Motacilla dba),
Pharoa's chicken "R'ljghug1-;u" (Nephron flO"cnnfJptfOrus), T. arge pied wag tn,il (Motadlla niadeo'as~
paten "is) J
Yellow headed wag tail (Motacina citreola ), Inrlian swift "K annya" (Micropus
affinis). King vulture "R7;j Gi,.-lh" (Sarcog:vps calvus),
White backed Vi Iture "Gidh"
(Pseudogyps benga-Iensis). Brahmingkite "C"eelri" (Hn.liastur indus \,
Shikra "811. 'kra'"
(Astur badius). Falcon (Falco Ju~ger). Red wattled la!lwing, ·'T'todC' (LobivaneUus
indicus), Black Libis "K'urldantb:" (Pseud 1 is Pp,pjllo8u8), Cattle Eagut
(Butulcus ibis),
Ashy wendarkher,
White necked stork (Dissoura episcopus) and White stork.

II. R"s1;dential bird8 ha:-rnJul to -agricultureBiros, whos3 diet is wholly ve,~')tari9,n ~..nd feed larg('Jy on cultivat0d grain or :frllj1A, bird,
who in b.rge numb-ws d"p"'nd UP')D rip-'ning crops ofjuar or bajra a,nd do a g':"0at aeal of d'-\mf>.ges
scm0 by - actual g':"'1iu t.hctt is Aat~n hut far more b:v the extrem,ely
wasteful 1lJ.0tll0d of
breaking off the whol'} ho,ad and tljrowing it ?JW~ly v;fkr eating on~ or two gndns and bn~;:ddnft of
~nother head and treating it thE' S3Jlli WfJ,y, bi.rds whose favourite. ins"cts are t-hese whi~h --are
a1assed as b9nQfi-:iICd such as hR"s. dr<'l.gon fliE's, have been jnoluded in - ~~he list of biT'd's
harmful to A,{ri r mltUl'0. It would snm a pity to S0m"} to find 1iho up-m,e of the pa,rrot at the ·top
of the list. It m"1'31; b", admitt0d th'1.t from a purely 8.est'hetic 8>UO non-utilitaritm point cf view
the p3.rrot is a d3cidedly h'ltndwnn~ and attractive hird. As a cage bird p?,rrot is 'ifue 'lwst
favourite, and w) the cynic,tl fwm-)r S'lys it deRf'TveS to pass its I'xistence 'vithin prison bars
-'Of the cage. '1 he follcl wing are the mo~t common, narnely:A

Rose ,ringed. parrot "tota",
house sparrows Hchitf1:",
Yellow throated spar}'ows
-green
b':>e-e~t-:;r.~, _hlu~
t'1it""o
b'e ·eat0rs,
common
rose
finch,
blue rock
pige.oh~
,",ckabutar" «(hlumba. livia). In rihu rio q dOV,3 "karneri"' (Strapto:p~lia decaocta) aDd little
brown dove kam'!.ri (Streptopeli~ sen€:ngalensis ).

VIII

III. Common birds oj neutral value to agriculiu1e
:ru the next list of the common birds found in the district which are of neutral value to
agricultlire are included those birds who do as mrllly beneficial things as harmful ones or whose
ex~st'.m,ce is either too insignificant or unnoticed from the former poir.:t of view. There are some
birds like ravens and crows which do plenty of useful work also but are equally destructive tocrops ;l.nd nuisance other}Vise which set off the good work which they do and hence have bee~
included under this classification. Thf:J following are the most common, namely:.The Raven" Bal: Kagla" ( Corvus cora.x); Commcn cr?w "K agla" (Corvus splendons)~
Black tIt ( Parus nachahs) Stone chat, (SaxlCo ... a torquata), Pled wheat ear (Of nan the picata)
Desert -wheat ear (Oenanthe deserti), Red start (Phocnic1.11 us OehIlll"US). Short billed minivet
(Pericrocotus brevirostris), Little minivet (Pericrocctus peregrinus). Rugous frented wrfn
warbler (Franklinia duchanan), Lesser white throat (SylVIa. currucDJ), Chifchaff (Plyll('scopus
colly bita), Strealead wren workler ( Franklinia buchanan), White throated mUDia (Uroloncha
malabarin,a), Red winged bush larks (Mirafra erythroptera), Ashy cro~l<:'d finch lark (Eremopteryx
gris9a). Peafowls- "mor" (Pavo cristatus), Common lost "Jol Kagln" (Fulica etra), Black wingE'd
stilt ( HimalJtopuS him'lntopus), Comm n sand piper ( Tringa hypol811cus), I . . ittle cormorant
(Phalacrocora niger), Indian darter \ Anhinga melanogaster) and Nukta duck (Sarkidiorir,s
melanotos).
.

IV.

Oom1non birds of gan-~e f(;'wnd l~n Bikarzer district

The use of birds as food for man is limited to the upper classes only. A rema.rkable
fact about the game birds is that they are very prolific.
Take for instance the grouse
of which three species are found in the district, the
fleeh of which is highly prized
as an article of food. Every year thousands of grouse aro shot
in this
district
alone and eaten, yet every year they can be found in tIle same large numbers when the gam.€"
season commences or their immigration time com.es. Grouse is incidrntally one of the most
WIdely distributed birds in the world and :is shot all over the world by millions every year. They
are very hardy birds and all 8hikar·ie8 have experipnced that they can carry awa.ya lot of lead.
without falling down. While feeding on the ground their colouration is so protective that one
does not notice them till one has almost trampled on thf"m when they quickly take off and fly
away fast. The following are som.e of them, namely:-Impedal sand grouse (Pt~roclese orientDlis), Pmt["iled sand grouse, Common sand grouse,
Common grey pa-ljridge (Francolinus pondicerianue), Great Indit'Jn bust.ard (Choriotis nigriceps)
Common. sta.rlings (Sturns vulgaris), Common hust.p.rn (Chlamydotis undule.ta), Comm.cn teal
(An ~,s crecc't), M:=tlla.rd (Anas platyrchyn cha,). Pintailed (Dafila acuta). Shovelle>l' (Spatula clypeata),.
Godwa.ll ( Chul",lfJ.smus streperus), F[m tail snipe ( Capop-llg galJinago), Bar headed goose (Ansel'
indicus), Lesser whistling teat-, (D:ll1.drocygna javanica), Br~,hm.ini duck (Casarca ferruginea),
White eyed pocharcl (Aythya.. rufa), Red crest<:>n. pocbard (Netta rufina ) Tufted po chard
( Nyroca fa,uligula) an(l Grf'Y pelican (Pelecanus philippensis).
The climate of the disbrict is drv and generalJy healthy thou~h characterized by extraordinary extr;mr-ness of tf'm.perature. During summer the he~t is
exceedingly great, hot winds blow with great force in the months of
12.
Climate and
May, June, and Rome day'i in July. Heavy Rfl"nd storms are a frequ('nt
Temperature
occurrcnse and, in fp,et, in f'xceptionalJy Sf'yrrc sa.nd storm.R, brf'aches
of railway line occur some tim.es, dela,ying trajlJS for sf'YcraI hours. Thf' sun during the day is
intense. It is not snfe to travel on cam.oJ, etc., during the aftrrnoon bours on a summ('r day.
On the other hand thf' ccld in thp winter is also generally ver.'" jntolse and trN"S ~nd
vew~tables
frequently
injered by frost.
The aVf'rage ill.can hm.]JPrgture If Bikaner
is 81° F. with m':"an dally range of abo'lt 22°F.
A ID>tximum tpm.perature of 120°F. in summers
and minimum of 28° F. in winters m.ay be expected jn an average yf"ar.
A relieving feature during thE summer season is that every time wrcn there iR intense
heat for a period of week or so cy sand storm. or a thUl).derstorm C'omf'S and cools off the weather
for two or three days.
Nights are eften pleasant
~fter about I I O'clock, the
Salla
having cooled off quickly after sunset, and by about 2 O'clock almost· all nights become very
pleasant. Big sand storms are known at times to last for several days without abating.

~

13..

In Powlett's Gazetteer of Bikaner Sta.te~ tbe rainfall of Bikaner has been given to be ~
little under 12" an nua11y , two-thirds of which falls in the nion:th~ of
Rainfall
July and August.
.

The underground water is the main source of water supply beth for drinking purposes
- and other uses. It is generallv found at 300 ft. below the ground
14. Underground
,
level and is only Sf\Vell to eight -feet deep. Percolc)~tion is scanty'with
water level
the result that even if a well is worked by a power drivfn machine
more water is only available if the well is left unworked for 4 or 5
hours. In certain places sweet water is not available jn the wells with the result that the villagers
have to travel long distances to fetch drinking water (aJJd the cattle get drinking- wate~ on~y
twice a week). In certain plac:es the water is se- salille and brakish that it is harmful to drllJ k It •
. II History

The present district of Bikaner lies just south of the river Ghaghar which was once,
it is ~aid, the ancient bed of tho Sutlej. Parts of the tehsUs of:r:rohar,
(a) Early History
Bhadra and Hanumangarh fall between the rivers Saraswatl. ~d
Drishadvati and most of the other tehsils of Ganganagar dIstrIct
ar~' north of the ancient bed of Sutlej. A{;cording to the Indian Antiquaries, the valley
IYlng between rivers Chenv.b and Sutlej is the land of Madra. In the Mahabharata, there ar_e
frequent references to Kuru-Jangala and Madreya Jangala. We may infer, therefore, that thIS
Jangal country was adjacent to both Kuru and Madra. Shabda Kalpad1um and other boo~~
give descriptions of the JangaI country, that it is a dry land full of such trees as khe}ra. ka~r,
aak etc. It would appear that the present district of Bikaner is the ancient Jangal country.
Unfortunately, nothing much has been mentioned in the Mahabharata about tJ:Le
civilisation of the Janga.l country. No Archaeological remains of value have been unearthed i l l
the Jangal portion of the Bikaner division. As expected, howcver, such remains ha:ve bee~
discovered in quite large numbers north of the Sarasvati and in the Sarasvati and Dr'lshadvat'b
valley. Th6 1917-18 Report of the Arcbae-logical survey of India, ill.entions the discovery of some
terr?,cotta representation of animal figures, hum8,n busts, with a marked Roma,n appea:ance,
a wlllged crouching Garuda, etc., in the Suratgarh area. These have beE·n dated as beionglll~ to
the first century of the Christian era. Such terracotta figures which are really very beautIfu~
~nc:I some' pl'e-historic pottery and blades were unoarthed during this period in the S~rasva.tl
Drlshadvati valleys a.nd are all preserved. in the Bikaner Museum. The most important f1nds of
the~e excav.ati?ns were two images-of Sar?~svati. The images-are about 4 feet high and made of
whIte stone .. - One of these- images, whicll -is extr(3mcly graCEful, is now in the National Museu~
in Delhi. The other image is in the Bik~n{'r Museum.
Very little is kno·wn of the J]istory of Bikanf'r district before it wa.s conquered by the
Rathors at the end of the 15th century A.D. The land belonged essentially to the Jats~ whc even
today comprise nearly half the popUlation of the djstrict. Except for one or two sites such as Mor~
~hana about 28 miles south-east of the city. aDd Bbandasar temple lying ·within the city, no other
Important archaeologitmJ remains of the pre-Rajput_:period exiRt in the district. The Morkhan~
temple was built, accoroing to the reading of one of the inscriptions, prior to ] 172 A.D.
Bhandasar temple built about 1411 A.D. is a Jain temple.
This would show that
Jainism Was quite influential in tJJC di_Rtrict eveD_ il). those days. The few coins of tho preRathore period which have._ be~n fou;nd belong to the Gupta or t'he Chauhan periods and do
not throw much light on the history of the Bikaner distrid.
.
Bikaner city WaS fou~d",n. by the' Rat-hors --in the spcond half of 15th cpntllry. Rathors
,
of Bikaner derive their origin from ,Joclhpur.
According to the
(b) Medieval History
tradition-al history Jodha Rathor, King of Jodhpur, ha.d 14 sons:
Bika, o~ BikraIll. orie of the sons of .Jodba feeling probahly that he
conld expect little inheritance at Jodhpur, set out in 1465 A.D. with his uncle Kandhal
to conquer the territory in the north.
He
came first to
Deshnok,
where there
was a famous Charan woman Karriiji, who was'said to have super-natural powers. Bika waited
fre-quently on Karniji and it is said that it is due to her help that be won the territory of Bika:rler...
One Shekha was the Rao of Pugal. RaGS of Pugal oelonge.d to the Bhati clan
Rajputs ~d:
were the most important family at that time in this area. It is said that Shekha lived mostly on
robbery-ana while he was·in prison on "'this Glrarge~, his daughter Wa-s married .to Bik.a. Later there
W'ere'battles between- these Bhatis and- Bika. In order'to avoid the trouble~ he founded the·for-t;
and the city in Sa;mvat" 1542-45. - Bikaner ha~ lJ~en -deli:ved from Bika:ramnagar. Tod, however"...:

of

in 'his Annals and Antiquities Of Rajasthan, says tha.t a Jat called Ner ag:te~d to give over this
land to Bika. on condition that the tlity would also be named after him, but this seems to be
improbable as ner generally means Nagar, e.g., Bhatn~l', jobner, Gajner etc.

·

The .tats, it appears, voluntarily acknowledged :Bika as their protector . . Probably they
found in Bika a strong man to protect them from Rajput looters and also from each other. The
important. clans of Jats at that time were, Godara, Sarans, Baniwa]s, Punia, Sahu, Kaswltl1,
.aind Sihag. The Godaras, the most importa.nt Jat clan, werE:. given the honour of puttin.g the
~ Coronation Tilak on Rathor Kings of Bikaner.
War between Bikaner and Jodhpur is a consta.nt fea.ture of the history of the place, upto

"the end of the 18th century.
According to Rajput traditions, Raisitlgh was the first chief of Bjkaner to be called
Raja of Bjk"l.ner. Anup Singh was made a Mahara.ja by Aurangzeb. Anup Singh was a.
learned malJ and ccllected a largE' number of Sa.I1skrit book~; which are :now preserved in t,he
Anup Sanskrit library. He himself wrote a number of books and patronized a number of
· musicians and Sanskrit pandits.
In tho early part of the 19th century Pindaris began to plllnder the territory and some
af the ~ha.kurs of Bikaner also rebelled. These lootf:t atJd insurructions became quite serious and
uncontrollable by the Maharaja himself. Mahara.ja, Buran Singh asked for British help. A treaty
was signed on 9-3 .. 1818 and Bikaner became a British protectorate. This is the only important
I<treaty Bikauer had with the British Government. There a.re other minor treaties relating
to railway and salt ;;uid extra rlition, etc.
Surat Singh died in 1828 and was succeeded hy his son ER.tan Singh. The Thakurs rebelled again in 1830 and for the next five years dacoitif'-s were rampant
in the south and south-eastern portions of the State. A spE.'lcial force
(0) British Period
kuown as the Shekhawati Brigade was raised and the Thakurs were
"Suppressed in 1835.
·
In 1851 Sardar Singh succeeded his father Ratan Singh. Sardar Singh rendered good
tmrvice to the British Government during the Mutiny and was rewardEd by the grant of TiDi
}l':l.rgana. in 1861. This Pargana consisted of 41 villa.ges of the Hissar district. Affairs werc badly
;t:n'l.uaged during th,:, reign of S'1rd 1,1" Singh. He ran into debt and tried to extort the Thakurs.
The 'rhakurs rose against the extortion. Matters weI'e. however, amiably arrangE'd by the British
Political Officer.
Sardar Singh died in 1872 a,nd his adopted son Dungar Singh succeeded him. There
was ag~in a rebellion by the Thakurs in 1883 when the Maharaja wa.nton to inc:teM€' the tribute
In liell of Mihtary se~vice. This was suppresged with a. show of fo:toe by the British. Dub gal'"
Shlgh ha.d adopted his brother Ganga Singh who when Eitill a minor, succeeded him
itt 1881.
Ganga Singh wa.s given full powers in 1898. The present Bikaner division might be called
of Ganga Singh. Though sixth in area among the Princely States of India, Bikaner
had a meagre revenuE' and was quit~ backward among these states. Ganga Singh built the railways,
brought in modern education, improved the administration, established an independent judiciary
a.nd nl'1de Bikaner one of the f0remnst states of India. In 1943, when he died, the revenue of
thp, Bikaner State, lying wholly within the Indhn Desert, was 12th among the native States.
Irl 1872 the revenue of Rikaner was about 10 lakhs. In 1947-48, it had gOYle to more than 3 ct'Ol'f'S
of rupees.
::t. creation

.

The greatest achievement of Ganga Singh was the bringing in of the Gang Canal.

Thi8

canal, hroug-ht in from the Sutlej by an 80 miles long concrete channel, ttansformed the face of the
llofl;hern

por1iion of the State and made Ganganagar the granary of Raja,~than.

Maharaja Ga.nga Singh belped the 13:ritlsh ill bo,th the Wal's abd 1\tas considered a faithfl!!
He waEJ one of the persons Who si~ed the Peace t:tE'aty at Pa.ris on behalf .ot
Xtldla. after the Fil'st World Wat". His son Sadtil Bmgh cathe to the throne iH 194:1 ..
8.n~ by them.

In 1947 Bikaue:u was one of the first States to sign the instrument of accession to India.
In 1949 the State was merged in the State of Rajasthan and ceased
. :(4) Alter Independ.ence
to exist a.s a political unit. Bikatter, now" became a division of
Rajasthan and was placed under a Divisional Commissioner. The State
was broken ,up into three districts. The Bikaner ,nizamat
of the State was made into
the plfeSel1t Bikaner distl'ict and a Collector and District Magistra~ "Was- app01nted to look
o.f1;61" the district. Bikaner State Railway Was merged in the North~l"n Railway and was made
into a division with beadqual'terl9 in the Bikaner .-,ity.
The High Court Was abolished and a
District and Sessions Judge took over the charge of judicial'Y.
Bikatler city has ]Of't much of its impol"tance and attr.:wticn si-nce it"3 merger with
Ra.jastha.n. It, however, stin remains the divisional hea.dquarters and as such retains many of the
GOTernment offices. The headquarters of the education department of Rajasthan are also
situa.ted in BikaIl er.
'
The Rajput conquest brought little change in thp life of the people. In place of the village
democracy, no doubt, a feudal systenl wa.s imposed bUG this m.eant
(e) Life of the :l»eople
ljttle except the payrrhmt of a nominal rent· to the Jagirda.rs.
Affairs of thp village continued to be decioed by the council of elders.
Being a desert area <lond away froIn the m_ain routes of India, Bikaner suffered little from
the Mohammedan attacks. In fact the Moghul army never entered 1ahe »f'ea of the district.
The centuries of long wa.rs IJP1ween Bikaner and ,Jodhpur affected only one' section
of the
population, the Rajputs; the others continued to eke out a living from the desert whet}
it
rained, and suffered from famine when the rains failed.
C

In the beginnig the Jagirdars were the close relations of the ruling chief. They were
supposed to give military help and sometime"! pa.y a nomin::d tribute to the Maha.raja but for
all practrie~d pnrpo:-;~s they were independent. Later when the Hystem of giving jagirs to imp01'"
tant servants of the }VIaharaja came into practice,
this indf"pendent sta.tus of the .Tagjl'darswas
gradu:=t.Ily lest. It lnight be mentioned in passing that Raja Rai Singh himself was considered a
Jagirdar of tho Empire ruled by Akbar and the Bikaver jagir Was given to him'by Akbar's Jarman
dated 1599 A. D. The rulers of Bikaner also never considered themsclves' fully independent
of the Moghuls, for, they never issued any coin ill their own name or used any insignia of
marked indep3ndont sovereignty.
In the city, Jain businessmen were the most important citizens. Then, as rJOW, they had
spread, all over India and carried on the trade of the country.
Some families fmch as Montas
were ve-.;y impo:rtant and held important positions in the Darbar.
A few of the Maharajas were learned mel,) and patronized the pandits. Some of them
wrote ~ooks themiOlelves. Mention has already been made of Maharaja Anup Singh who at the
time of Aurangzeb gave shelter to musicians and learned men. He patronized the following 9.uthors
and musicians:
Vajdya.nath Suri
Maniram Dixit

author

"

Bhadra.raIil
"
Anatltabha,tta
Sheta-mba£ Udai Chandra "
Bhava Bhatta (Sangitrai) ,.
He

of

Jyot pattisar (Jyotish)
Anup Vyavah3,r Sagar (Jyotjsh)
Anllpvilas (Dharma. Shastra)
AYl_lt-lakshahomakotj-prayog {on Yajna)
Tirth 3,ra tnakar
P~nditya. Darpan
Sangit Anupankush, ATJUp Sangitvilas etc.

also.got written books krlown as Shuksarika, Baital Pach?si, etc., in the Rajastbani

1a.nguage.
Rai Singh and Ka1,"na Singh also patronizf'd some pandits during their :reigns. Rai Singh
hitnself W'.tote 'Ra.i~ingh Mahotsab' a.lld a commentary of Sripa.ti's Jyotish Ratanmala. The Jain
Sadhu Janan kitnala completed his commentary on Shabdaveda. during his t"eign.
Anup Singh's father Karna Singh patron~zed thE" following autbors:dallga Nand Maithil
Bhatta Hosihak
Mudgal

author of

"

"

Kama Bhushan
Ka vya dakini
Karns .. va tans80
ltarrtasatosh etc.

<f> _ A.:rchaE!0~ogy
. Archit,ectural- remains are few in ,Bikaner.
three -ouly' are interesting. -

Among

the

older buildings the following,

(i) Morkhana Te.mple.-Morkhall8- is a village, 28 miles south-east: of Bikaner city and
._ _
about 14 miles from Deshnoke. There is a small temple in this village built of Jaisalmer
stone and according to Dr. Goetz this was originally a shai'l:ite tem,pl.e and in about the 15th
century Was ta.ken over by the Jains. The temple has on its exterior carved images but
mallY of these have been covered by white plaster after tre temple came under the
Jams.
The
architecture
of
the
temple
bas
also
bten
considerably
mod.ified.
It, is dedicated
to
one Susani Devi
Who
is
the
K'Ulde~'i
of
the
SuI"ana
Os'wals. It is said that this Susanj Devi was a Surana girl and was very beautiful. Nawab of
Nagaur wanted to maury her. The girl ran away when the Nawab of Nagaur wanted to captur~
her and vanished into the earth at the spot where the temple is now built. A few inscriptions
have been found on the temple from one of which it appears that the temple was buHt prior to
1172 A. D. Another inscription states that olle Sanghesh Chahar installed the image in this
renovated temple in 1573 Vikrami (1516 A. D.) This inscriptiOll has been reprod.uced in Jain,
Lekh Mala.
.
(ii) Bhandasar Temple.- This is a very heautiful Jain temple.
It
is situated'
within the city. It is said that one ,Bbanda, all Oswal Mahajan, built this temple in
ahout 1411 A. D.
It appears that the original structure of this temple has been built over
a number of times.
built
by Raja Rai Singh in 1645-50
V. S.
(iii) RikanM' Fort.- This was first
al' d is
(1588-1593 A.D.) The fort is 1,078 yards in circumference
Hurrounded by a'
moat. Va.rious Maharaja.'s have added to the palaces inside the fort. Among these the .
following are important.

Gaj Singh-

Phool Mahal, Chandra Mahal, Gajmandir.

Surat Singh-

Anup Mahal.

Sa,rdar Singh- RataI.l Niwas.
manner

Walls of seme of these palaces are inlaid with gla~s.
in gold and ren.

Others are pail.ited in a pleasing,

As all·eady mentioned, no local coin issued before the Rajput occupation has been found
- in the district. Even 8.fter the Rajput occupation, the rulers of Bikanen
(g) Coins
did not issue any coins in their own name and Moghul coins were -qsed
in this A,rea. When the Moghul power declined at the time of Alamgil' II. the Bikan<:::r Da.rbar obtained permission to mint the Moghul coins. No
coins, however, were issued before the accessicn of Rhah Alam the second in 175'9 A.D. and coins continued
to be issued in the name of Shah Alam upto ] 859 A.D., i.e., long after he was dead. These coins
bore on one side the wOlL"ds 'Bicca Mubarak' 'Gazi Alam Shah' and on the other "San JuluB Maimanat Manus." In addition the coins bore the insignia of the Maharaja issuing the coin, such
as the flag in the case of Maharaja. Gaj Singb, the trishula or tbe flag in the case of Surat Sillgb~
kirania in the case of Ratan Singh, etc. After the Mutiny the coinF!'. of Sardar Singh had the word~
"Aurang Araye Hind Wa Englistan Queen Victoria 1859" oIl one side and the words "ZlJ.rb SrI
Bikaner 1916'~ in Persian character on the 0pposite side. In addition these had the insignia of
the Ma.haraja issuing
the coins. In 1893 as per an agreem.sllt with the Bdtish Gove~me~tf
Bikaner coins were minted in Brit:rsh mints. These coins h8.ve the belJ.d of Queer. Victona WIth
the words "Victoria Empress" on onD side in f>Ilglish letters and the words "Mg,hara.ja Ganga
Singh Bhadur'\ on the other side in 'nagri a.nd urdu characters. However, Bikaller coins we~e­
discontinued after some time and lately only the British Indian coins were used Inthe State.
In addition to the silver .currency coirJs, the state als0 issued silver .coins for the purpose
of Nazar. These were slightly bigger and full weight coins, and much hetter finished than ordinary
current coins. Some Gold Muhars cf Ratan Singh, Sa,rdar Singh and. DUllgar .Singh have'
been seen but these were never nropably us~d for currenoy purposes.

ID Social and Ou~urat Aspects.'

in

The staple food of the people
this 'district is bajra. Other food grains used are wh'ea.~
barley, gram, jowar and- rice. But they are limited to thE' richer
(1) Food
classes of thE' towns; the rural people use the coarse grainR
generally and use wheat only on special occasions. Rabri, a p:re~
ration of ckhachh and bajra is very COmmOIJ.
The Mohamnledans,. Rajputs and Charans, both in urban and rural areas, are nonvegetarians. Beef, ho"\vever, is not taken at all bv the Hind.us, as in other pitIts of India. Even
the Musljms.,jn Bikaner, do not take bef'"f to respec{ the reljgious feeljyjgs of the Hindus. 'Brabmin8:
Vaishyas, Jains, Bishnoi and 0ther communities are strictly vegetarian. Pulses mostly used:
are moong, moth, and gram. Vegetables comm,only CGrLflnmed are gawar'ki-phali, low, kakri~
kachar, t1~ndsi. sangri and khumbi. Dried -up kakri, and tindl$i (phophalia) are a speciality of
this district and people relish bajri-k'i-roti. and phophalia-ka-sag very much. Other vegetables
or fruits wl1ic:h are used only by the wl'lI-to-do classes in urban areas are not grcwn jn the district
and are imported from Delhi and .Jaipur. Green vegetables ar{' not taken by the Jains ata;t,t
on particular days. They llse only nulses and dried vegf'tables. Mnk and ghee are used in plen,t:r
by lLrban and rural people alike. Most of the peopJe in the villa,ges keep ('ov.-s or buffn,lo€s and;.
tht-'refore. milk and ghee are abundantly used. Milk products mostly used, are ghee, chhachh, khoa
or mawa. curd, butter etc. Condiments useo in this district are- tne same which are used in other
parts of India and are all impcrted from outside.
Oils ('ommonly used are must9.!"d and Ctit
~ugar is used only in Bikaller city and. other toW'IlS.
The masses use gur in daily life and suga,r
IS used only 01. special occal"!jons.
Due to control on sugar and its availability at a uniform scale
to the urban and rural people a.t a fajrly cheap rate in war-time, even the rural people have nowa-days taken to the use of sugar to a certain extent.
The fcod generally taken en special occa~jon8 like lllarriagcs. deaths, births and festivals
consistR of 'dal-ka-shira', halva made of moong-ki-dal. and teh(I:Fi~
Food on special occaa rice preparation and other commer. sweets in Bikaner city
sions
and other urban areas while atta-ka-sh1'ra and churma made of
bajri-ki-roti mixed with gur and ghee are generally used in rural
areas. 'Khecchra' is a speciality of Akha T('rj; kheer ar.d ot.her sweet dishes are taken during
8Mradks _and on the occasions of other festivals also. People ["enerally -perform 'oBar-s' on the
occasion of deaths in the familv and the richer a mall, the- larger the numbpr of -per~onf1 be feeds
a~ the time of 'osar'.
Mohammedans eat '8avians' a,nd 'zarda pullao' on Id-ul-F#ter and various
,kinds of meat preparation on Id-ul-Zuha etc. Rajputs and Charans and some of the so-caned
low?r classes especially Dhobis use alcoholic driI?ks extensively jn their daHy ]if~. particuJarly
~r:mg marriages and on other festival occasions like Holi etc. Rajputs take opium togeth(':r ,on
Alcha Peep.
People in the city gpnerally take only two meals a day Clie in the morning at about 9 to
10 A.M. and the other in -tohe evening at a.bout 6 P.M. .Jains irlvari&bly
Hours of Meals
take their evening meals before sun-set. In rural areas,
peopl~
take 3 meals a day. The farmers and those who help tllem on the
~arm have their first meal in the morning before going out to the fjelds to work., This meal which
:18 called 'siravan' eonsjsts of rabri a.n-d is taken at about 6-30 A.M. in the mOrTJing durjng summer
~d at about '7-30 A.M. in winter. The second meal which is known as 'dopehri' is taken at about.
lDId-day and conaists of bread made of baj1·a and some dry vegetahle or dal and some chhachk.
Ev~njng meal is taken at about 7 P.M. whicb consists of bread made ofbajra or some other co~r~
g;arn, with raw onions, chatni of red chilies 0r some ot.her dried vegetables. EveI1in~ meal SOIIle ..
1;u:p.es consists of khichra of moth and bajra, witb milk or purd.
The normal etiquette is tha.t shoes are not worn at meal times. Food is kept at a slight.ly
, ,
higher level than that of the person taking meals. Pecple p:enerally
Ji'~d etiquette
have only a dlwti on while taking food and the rest of the body,is
,
na.ked. They also thank God for having supplied them with food
before actually starting eating. People in the oity and urban areas take their food usually af'ter
taking a bath. The urban people take their food in kitchen itself called 'ch;owka~ while the
rural people take their meals in tlie'kftchen- or on cot or patta or anywhere t'bey are serlred with.
Sweets are served first' a.nd jf servoo together people generally begin with sweets. 'Papar" is
-served in the city inva.riably at the end of the meals and as soon as it is served, it is ooturi.deJ!eil
all tbe last item of the menu.
'
., ' . .
,., , '

There are usually three items of the dress of the male as well as that of female. The
dress of the ma.le is usually composed of a turban" a shirt or a bagal
(~) Dress
bandi and dhoti. Orhni, angi!J, and ghagra constitute female dress.
The use of turban in the urban area, however, is on the decline and is
,
.
no longer the universal dress. It has been replaced by a cap aD~
genet"aUy people prefer to go bare-headed. '1 he bagalbandi has also been replaced by a shirt
and a buttoned-up close neck coat. In the case of.womel.l alse. they like to put on lahenga or
sari. in place of gbagra.

In Bikaner city and ·other towns, most of the people dress in a. style which is a mixture

of local a.nd western style.

During the time of the rulers, a pair of breeches or a pantaloon. a.
close neck coat with a turban and a pair of pump shoes was the usual mess. But with the
formatio.t; of Rajasthan, breeches have gone out of use.
Now-a-days people generally use a bushsbirt and a pantaloon and the afgan chappalor
.pump shoe. Some people use the bushshirt with dhoti also. Many people use hats or caps iD
place of turban or like to go bare-headed. Pantaloon and pajama are the chief under-garment
for thf' offjcia.ls and othor gentry while dhotis are used by other clas~es of people. The Uppel
garment consists of a shirt and an english coat or close neck coat or a hushshirt.
There is very little difference in dress between Hindus and MUfllims. The principal distinction, is that the Muslims wear trousers (c!:'ust pajamas) with narrow openings. Kaimkbani
.Muslims, however, llse the normal Hindu dress. The Muslim women put on a very long' shirt upto
knees and sometimes even lower than that.
Variations according to com.munitiC's can. be ('asily marked in m~.le as well as fem.ale dress.
Every community has its own style of wearing the turban. The Rajputs and communities associated with them Uk'? Charans, etc. put on the Bik:tn0ri saJa, which has curves on the left and
.band on the right wjth an end hanging on t~)0 b::tck. In many cases, one comes across a butdar
pag. Maheshwari and Brahmjns wear a round pag and Oswals a curved pag. Morc than a dozen
varieties can bc seen in the style of the p"fg in the city itself. The villagers generally use a.
white saJa. The pa:Jref3 of the M'l.rwad sefh"J of Bi~\:a.n"w h p3culiar and is familiar all over India.
They can be- easily recognised from their dr.es~ whi8h consists of a silk chola, silk banyan,
a sup3rfine d"ft.o!i, a pSl.ir of pump shO':~s and a lU"J.Iti-C'oloured Pagree. Their ladies keep a d'llptta
round their waist in addition to the normal dress which constitut~8 a kurti, lehnga, or sari and
.an Orhni. The R3.ths in Pugal and Magra areas put on a white turban which keeps the middle
of the hea,d uncovered, a long and loose chola and a coarse cloth lOGngi or tahmet. Muslim
.Gujars wear d'li?ti.~, half shirts and round s':tfa<!. Gujar women or milk-maids wear a ghaghra,.
a. long kurti with full sleeves and an orhni. There a.re, of course 7 slight differences in the mode
and style of dress from community to community. The general dress 7 howE?ver, is a shirt7 a dhot;'
and a. turban for the males and a gh.agra, kurti and an orh-ni for the females in the rural area.
The dress used on festivals and other special occasions is very colourful and attractive
to look at. The lehnga~ kurti and orhani with threads of gold or
Dress on special occa- silver called 'gch,' are used by the females on special occasions. The
sions
males of the well-to-do classes wear a long coat and a chooridar
pajama with a. dopatta around their waist. kesaria 8aJa (Saffroncoloured turban) is generally worn by the urban people on ceremonial occasions. The 8ardarB
i.e.,. nobles also used to have a sword bv their side on ceremonial occasions. sah1.lkars or the
Marwari 8eth8" as they are better known, have their own peculiar dress. Their ceremonial dress
consists of a silk shir1i. a long coa.t, a superfine dhoti, a. pair of pump shoes and a multi-ooloured

pagree.
On funerals, people put on black or white dress. The women folk put on black o,.h,,"
a.nd mcn a white turbl1n if there is some death in the family.
People in the villages generally use a cbeap find coarse woolen coat or a lo .i to protect.
themselves from cold during winters. The dress during the summer, however, is as described
.above.
Ornaments worn by women folk are numel"OUS and elaborate. In Bikaner city and other
towns, the women folk of the· setks and sahuka,.s and ether well-to.,.
OIDaments
do classes mostly use gold orna.ments, while the poorer sections o£
society in the city and the women folk in rural area gene:rally pula QJ\).

· ornAments made of silver. .The Inen generally donot use any ornament except a gold necklace,.
a bazooband, and usual finger or ear rings. The most common ornament of women is bOf'ia made
of gold or silver studded with glass beads. It is used by Hindu married women both in urban
and rural areas. Othe-r ornaments used in the urban areas are har and timania for the· neck,
b.azooband and chotk on the arms, rings for the ears, bangr1:an or choorian for the ha.nds, rings
in the fingers and naivri, kadla and pflyal for the foot.
In vjIlage galsa1i, (Gold) and hansll
(silver) for the neck, laung for the nose. su,-rlirt for the ears, choorians of lac aIld kadli for the hands
aDd bazooba",d, and trzd,za for the arms a.re the common orl.aments.
No arms are <:>arried daily in the- cities. In villages, however, a long staff conunonly
known as 'lathi' is carried daily. The villa.gers use country-made
Arms
guns and 'sela' as and when their necessity arises. The Rajputs
used to carry a· sword sometimes back but now -a-days they
use it only on sp9cial ocoasions. setks and ~ahulca"8 also carry a sword 011 ceremonial
o('casion s.
The houses of If'ading businessmen. traders and other \vell-to-do people in the city are
imposing buildings and are generally made of red stone. Stone
~3) Dwellings
patti8 are generally used for roofing. Use of cement for floering- is
very common. The houses in Bikaner city and suburbs are generally
pMoa. The poor people, however, livo in !cacha hous('s. The houses of evNl well-to-do people
are often dark ann ill-ventilated though they are frequently covered with lavisn and bountiful
ornamentation. OrdiDary rules of sanitation ~"re not observed properly. The traditional
dwellings in Bikaner city a.nd other towns of the district consist of a house with a front room
(bar,<;ali) and open square known as ang7.n and a third inner room known as .sal with innermost
room known as ora. The valuables of the family are kept in this safe room. The more well-todo add a malia in the second story. The· rich p?ople in the city have generally three'-storeyed
Douses. In Bikaner city most of the houses have no latrines and it is an uncivilised sjght to see
women answering the call of nature in the Iv.u0s early in the mor.ning. The sanitary conditions
are v"'ry poor anrl CO'1Rf'rV!'I.n('y anangements are far from satisfactory. since there are no
drainq even in certain localities. A City Improvement COlnmjttee was formed some years
back for developirlfl the city on modern sci~ntific lineR. A new refugee colony with well.
ventilated bousE'S has sprung up near the Public Park, after the coming of refugees from
Pakistan.
In villages houses are generally kachha with roofs made of reeds (8irkl~). People generally
·ha.ve enclosures made of thorny hedges around their hOllses or huts. Besides, there are Dhanis
jn rural areas. These are temporary villages with onf' or two huts where the cultivators live only
-four months in thp. year during the crop season.
Water ,vas a. terrible problem in Eikaner district some times back but now pipes have been
.furnished in every chowk. Even now it is a problem and people have to wait on the pipes for
hours together for their turn hut the problem is not so acutp as it was formerly.
During sumlUOT ~ people generally get up early and start their work at about 7 0' clock
in the morning. They work upto 12 lIoon and then take rest upto 3
(4) Daily Life
in the afternoon. Then re-start and work upto 7 P.M. The shopkeepers, however, keep their shops open throue-bout tIle day. In
winter, people start their work a.t 9 A.M. and work upto 5 P.M. Th(-'- shops, hGwever,
:remain open upto 8 P.M. After their day's work, poopk of the mohalla meet and gossip
together on a patta kept in the chowk for the purpose. They talk on all matters concerning them
-Qnd-then go to their bed at about 10 in summe:r; and at abcut 9 in winter. Quite a large number
"Of people in the city are workless and most of their tim'3' they waste in playing at cards or cllaupe'r
or gossip. The women folk get up very early in the morning and prt'pare atta for the day~s
'consumption at the hand-mill (chakki), bring water from the taps, which have now been provided
in each chowk for their domestic use. After that thoy generally remain indoors and keep themselves busy in household affairs. In rural areas people get on to their work early 11J the morl}jng
and work till 12.noon. They take their mid-day meals in the fiel.ds. Their "Y0:m.~ folk gei up
early in the mornmg and prepare the aUa foJ;' the day's consumptIOn. They mllk the cows and
buffaloes and also fetch water from the village wen and sweep their houses . . They also help
their husbands in their field work besides performing the normal houE-ehold· dutles. In the evening. the villagers return. home and take their fbod at about 7 P. M; . There after people a.ssemble
ioge1iher, smoke ckihm, iialk for ,an _ho'l~ or, so. and then go to thelr beds.

Polyga.mous marriages. arE all exceptio:rr~and not the rule even iIi those eomm.unities -w:&e:re
it is permissible by la.w or custom. Althoue-h 'polygamy;s permiSSible
(6) CustOn:lS and
among Muslims, yet instances of polygamy even among thom. a.J"O
Manners
few. Jains and Hindus and others are all monogamous. Widow
re-marriage is nC't permissible_ among the caste Hindus. - Bu.
-.mong -other classeS.. it is very eommOll.
Widow re-marriage is permissible according to
MUf.illim law, but in praotice. it iEt Dot common even anlOngst -them. - In
rural area~
a.mong the Jats widows generally marry their busband's younger brother after tbe husband'.
death. This is called churi pahnana. When there is no ycrUl>ger brother of the husband, she
IDarri3s some one else:. This marriage is knOWlJ as nata. Divorce is common amongst the
Mohammendans ancl Harijans but it is not to be found at all in easte Hindus.

. _.

<

All the sons have equal rights in the property of their deceased fat.her. while the da-ughters
have no such rights. In .Tagirdars, primogenit.ure is the I;ule, i. e., the eldest sen succeeds
and gets aU the property of his d~ceaAed father. The other hrothers get just a maintenance
allowance caned guzara.
A male who has no male issue, adopts one of the male children of his nea.rest relative.
The adopted son acquires the rjgbt of successjon in the adcptive father's property and forfei$8
all his r:ights on his real fath€r's property.
The Hindu family is joint in food, worship and estate, and still forms the unit of Hjndu
Society. .Joint family system is an jnsu~ance against old age~ sjckness and unemployment
but at the same time it sometimes becomes a great burden on the head of the family when it
begins enooura~ing drones i1? the family.

Purdah. System, strictly speaking is prc> va lent among the Rajputs and communit~es
associated with them. Among .Jats and other commuuities, strict purdah is not observed.
Their ladies, however~ vei] their faces from the elders of their husband's :family. The daughters
of the villages do not observe any purdah in the village. One of the interesting feature of .the
purdah system in Bika,ner is that the daughter-in-law observes purdah from the elder
ladies of the family of their husba.nds.
A very interesting custom among the Pnshkarna community, which has a population of
a.bout 10,000 in Bikan.er city alone, js that mass marriages take place amongst them aft€"p
every four years. If some ODe is not able to marry his daughter or son in the sava, he has to
wait for another four years. Exception however, is allowed when the marriage is celebrated In

ihllsava.
in

Ohild marriages are very common in
district as in other parts of India.

all

communities.

Caste systeDl is a.s rigid

Bikan~r

Sixteen 8an-skar8 prescribed by tlle Hl:ndu Sha8tras wer(' stri('tly observed in olden days. TheiJ"
purposC' was to purify the body and the soul of the Hindu and· to
(6) Rituals
regulate his life in accordance with Dharma.
They covered the life
of man froni his conception to his death.
The form of some of the
sanskars has~ however. been undergojng change under the impact o£ changing social conditioDs
from time to time. The influence of Mugbal supremacy and that of British rule and westel"B
oulture has -brcugbt about certain changes in the form and manner of observance of. these
8an8kar8 and now-a-days only about half a dozen of them are observed in practice in Blkaner

district.
(i) Nama-karna:-(Naming of the child). Among the orthodox Hindus, ha9)an and wor.
ship are performed and the Jyotski reads the horoscope and suggests a name or names or
tbe letter with which_ ~he na.me should begin. However, among a considerably large section
of Hindu population, particularly in the rural areas, this sanskar is only nommaU,..
observed.

(U) Ni8hkrdma1t:-{Taking child out of the bouse for the first time). The child and
iGs mother are given new clothes to wear. The child and the mother a·re then taken to
«nne nearby temple. Among the Goswami Brahmins, who are one of the most orthodox of
4ibe Hindus, the c.. hild if" taken to N aug aza Pir's Mazar for being placed a-t the feet of the Pw..
11:1 ~e night" ladies gather at the house of the child's fa.ther and sing sollgs of joy and daw.::c~
Some- a-1so call dholal1-s, to sing congratulatory or -badkai songs.
..-.J

XVII

(iii) At.na Prashana:-(Giving of food to the child for the first time). This sanskar
is performed on an auspicious day when the child is 6 monthM old. Among the maj?rity ?f
the people, no ritual is, performed on this occasion, however, the child is given Khlr to S]P
pref6rably with the help of a golden ring. Sometimes, the family organises a feast also.

(iv) Vapana (First cutting of the hair of the chHd):-This sanskar is performed wbe!1
the child is about 5 years of age. Usually a jat (worship or sacrifice) is promised at .the
shrine of a God or Goddess and hair of the child is cut for the first time at such a shone.
People in this district perform this sanskar commonly known as Jhandula or Mundan at the
shrine of Bhaironji, Ramdeoji, Jambaji or Hanumanji, where group worship is offered by the
devotees of the God and there is a big assemblage in the form of M ela at the place wbe~e t~~
shrine is located. Such melas are held atKodamdesar in Magr,a. tahsil, at the shrine of Bha'L'lon)'1.
at Pundrasar in Bikaner tehsil, at the shrine of Ha'l2umanji, at Deshnoke at the shrjne of
Karniji etc. In many cases, however, the hair is cut at the hOllse itself. Havana is perfcrmed
and Brahmins, are fed on this occasion.

(v) Karan vedha (Piercing the ear-lobes of the chiId):-Thjs is a universal practice
among all classes of Hindus both urban and rural. But no rjtual is generally performed
these days.
(vi) Yagnopa'l:it (Wearing of the sacred thread).:-This sanskar is performed by the
Brahmins, Vaishyas and some sections of the Rajputs while the Jats, Oswals, Jains and
Shudras do not observe this snn8ka-r.
This is expressly prohibited for the Shudras.
Among certain classes like Modi, and some Bal1ias this san8kar is performed on the day
before the marriage of the boy. Among the orthodox Blahm-ins, this sanskar mus~ 1:e
performed before the child has completed his 13th year. Among the Vaishyas, age lImIt
is 15 years. Among the local Modis. the sacred thread is discarded by the wearer and
~ied to the branch of a P1'pal tree the day following the marriage of boy.
This sanskar js.mo~e
Important or at least equally important for the Brahmins as the marriage itself. The chIld. JS
administered Gayatri Ma'1ltra into his ear either by the head of the family or some elder relat!ve
or by some Guru. The head of the child is clean shaved by the heredital'Y barber of the famIly.
Who also becomes the torch bearer of the boy when the latter rides a horse to go round the houses
of rela,tives for Tilak after the Mantra has been administered and havans performed. The boy
with a yellow loin cloth, a stick, a book, a begging .Jholi (bag) and a kamandlu (jar) and a deer
skin nUlS out of the house towar.ds Kote Gate with hundred of boys running behind him a.nd.
the boy is supposed to be running towards Kashi for education. The boy is then brought back
home in a procession, women singing the song "Kesria lado jivta reh". It is after this san8ka~
that the boy is supposed to become a full fledged Brahmin, since he gets to know the Gayatn
Mantra and becomes qualified to study the Vadas.
(vii) Vivah (Marriage):- Vivah sanskar is: still perfornled strictly in accordance with
Vadic rites by all caste Hindus. The worship cf Ganesh, Nava Orah (9 stars), Lord Vi8hnu.
Havans and Saptpadi characterise thE' strict Hindu form cf marriage in this distIi{'t. There
is consirlerable influelJCe of the feudal mode of society on tbe outward form of marriage
in as much as the bridegroom or the' Bindraja' is privHeged to remain yidjl:.g his horse even in
royal presence.
In almost all communities except the Brahmins, the bridegroonl ties a sword
by his side and rides a horse. There are, however, slight variation in the form of marriage
Irom community to community.
(viii) Ohitagni (Funeral ceremony):-Ohitagni is a long process and the ritual connected
with it actually begins at the house of the deceased itself. A fire is carried to the burning
ghat and with that -fn'e, chita j'S lighted. This san8kar of putting the fire to the chita is
performed by the eldest son.
The eldest son breaks the skull of the burning body with a
bamboo stick and pours ghee OVE'l" it. This is known as the kapal kriya. It is a. common belief
that jf thjs san.9kar lE! not performed by the son, tbe deceased person does Dot go to Heaven
and his soul does not get peace.
The SOll or sons of the deceased person have to
feed thE; whole community on the 12th day of the death. This is known as osar ceremony.
Very lavish expenditure js incurred on marriage and osar and these are two important factors
responsible for the economic ruin of the rural masses and~ during these days, of the middle
classes in the city also.

Jains obs~:t:'ve aimo~t all the HIndu rituals except yagnopavit and kriya. Their birth,
-nama karan,· marriage, dea.th ceremonies, etc., are a.lmost the same 8.S those of Hindus.

XVIII

lndia.

Similarly the rituals observed by t.he Muslims in Bikaner a::r:e the same as in other parts of
They 00ver the life of man from his birth to his death.
Fairs and

festivals play an important pa.rt in the life of our people.
They
are the Inarket places where local produce is exchanged and
(7) Fairs & Festivals
where goods made in other parts or adjoining areas are made a vailable_
Often fairs are held at religious centres giving an added inspiration
to the people to gather together. Fairs give a touch of gaiety to an otherwise drab existence in
the villagoes. The principal festivals celebrated
in
this
district are Navrairi~ Gangor,
Aleha Teej, Rakshabandhan, Dashera,Dewal£, Basant Panchmi, Holi and various Jayantees
among the Hindus and 1~loharrmm, Ramzan, Idul-Milad-ul-Nabi, Idul-Fitar and Idul Zuha
among Mus-hms. '1 heir mode of celebration is the same as elsewhere.
Like theso all-India-festivals, there are numerous local festivals which a,'E celeberated
with great enthusiasm. The lUOSt important among them are: Deshnoke. Shivabari, Naginijee
Kod-zmda'5ar. Rrtmdeojee, Jam uhaj'e e, and Kolayat fairs. Dada-ji-lca-mela and Jethu Bhutta
fairs are alsJ very popular.
The prindpal games played in the urban areas of Bikaner distrif't are football, volleyball, hockey, tennis and cricket, out of which t.he latter three
(8)Amusements
are played
in Bikaner city only. Besides, gym.nastic
exercises,
athletics are also a regular feature of sports life ill Bikaner. The
popular indoor games are table-tennis, chaupar, chess and carrum. The other gam.es played
are kaba1,di, ankh michr;n£ and kite flying. The important clubs in Bik8.ner are the Sadul
Ctub, Bikaner Sporting Club, Railway Club, and Golf Club. Bikaner l1as one of the
biggest st'l,diums in the country with a seating capacity of about 40,000 spectators. Most of
the tDurnaments are held here. The main games and sports played in the rural areas are
lcabrzddi, mardrr,ri, lathi exercises, ankh mi(~honi, kho, etc. The main in-door games are
clvtupa'r, cat'ds and e"''tr-bhar. Ramlila, raslila. bh.ajans,
kirtan-s
from
Ramayan
and
Mahabh.-"rat and kutputli are very pOllular in the 1'ur31 areas.

Kavi Sammelans and MU!3hairas are a regular feature

of the cultural life of BikalJer.

Cinema has become very popular in Bjkaner like the rest of India. There are
3 ein3m'l. hous3s ia Bikaner city. The important libraries and reading-rooms in Bikaner are
King GOO1;ge V Silver .Jubilee Library, Anup Sanskrit Library, Sajjanalya, Nagri Bhandar
and Pethia Library.
System ofnomenc1ature is simple and the llames aIe generally of religious origin. Com.moll
nanles are Hanuman Prasad, Devisjngh, Ram Dev, Lakshmi Narain,
(9) Nomenclature
etc. In some cases, names are given after Nakshatras, e.g., .Tethadas,.
Mnlaram, etc.
The suffixes giveIJ are Lal, Ram, Das, Singh, ChalJd
etc. The R3.jputs generally have 'Singh' (lion) as their suffix, e.g., Ganga Singh, Ram Singh,
R1:lghnath Singh. Singh is added to t.he name to denote the strength of a lion among the Rajputs. Vaishyas generally keep their names after money, jewellery, riches, etc.,as thcy are tradesmen and lovers of riches. Common names amongst them are Pannalal, Hiralal, SampatmaI,.
Kirorimal, etc. Shudras generally have very short names, e.g., Ladu, MeghIa, Dhuria, etc.
The ff'Inale names are gellf'rally given after the names of Goddesses. rivers, flowers. etc.~
e.g., Saraswati, Durga. Ganga, Champa. Chameli, etc. The general suffixes in the case of females
are B3,i, D3Vi, K3.nwar, e.g., Mohan Bai, La.! Kanwar, Tara Devi.
In rural areas, the males usually have one name only which is the diminutive of a name
of higher classes, e.g., Bheria, Meghla, Kalu, etc. Among the females also, the names given are
sbort and the name of wife often corresponds with that of her husband, e.g., MegbIi wlo Meghla,
Jethi w /0 Jetha etc. The names of Mohammedans are the same as in other parts of India.
Pushkarna Brahmins in Bikaner city have generally two names-one the birth name and
the other givelJ out of affection or fancy of elders.
The latter names are gener311y givel} a.fter
tbe nam9S of animals. with Maharaj as suffix, e.g., Bini (oat) Maharaj; Gadbya (donkey) Maharaj,
Kapiya (m~nkey) Maharaj, Sua (parrot) Maharaj, etc.
The names of villages in B,ikaner district have generally 'Bar' (tank) a.s their suffix. ThIS
is beoanse water is of great va.lue in thi~ desert diAtrict on aocount of aoute soa.rcity, e.g., Ambasar,

Gharsisar. Bhi:uasar" Napasar~ etc. Besid€~. the_names of some- 1iO>WDshave been kept a.fter thename
of some rural Oll' other im,portant personality~ e.g., Bikaner after Btkajl, Gangashaher after GangaSingbji, Napasar after Napaji.
The names of buildings are generally kept on the name or ca.ste of the owner such as
Khazanchi building, Daga Building, Chopra, Katla, Rama Niwas, Bhagat Niwas, Mahesh
BUIlding etc. The mohallas are known by the caste or community of people residing there, e.g.,
Vyason ka-cbowk, Badhanion -ka-chcwk, Banthia chowk, Dagon-ka-chowk, Bega.nion-ki-pirol etc.
Domestic anjmals are generally given names according to their colour, e.g., Kali, Bburi,
DhoH, etc. are some of the names given to cows. Similarly, dogs are called Ka.Jia, Bhulia, etc. In
the city, dogs are generaH,} given pnglish names, e.g .., Tomy, Tjger, Puppy, etc.
Be-Hefs play an important part in the life of our people. They have great faith in dtl-stiny, nature or God and in their powers which are pcpularly expressed
(lO) Beliefs
as bhag, kudrat or His lila.
Thiljgs ordjnarj]y jnexplicable are
ascribed tc God 'f'! lila. This philosophy being essentially religious is
accepted by people belonging to all faiths.
Another doctrine in which people have tremendous bf'lief is their faith in the theologic&.l
counter-part of the law of causation, viz., theory of Karma, i.e., whatever you do in this wcrld
sbapes and influences YOUI deEtiny in next life.
The third if3 the belil?f in a universal moral order. A few universal and eternal l)f'in~
ciples of morality for Example truth. hOIJe1"t,y. chastity. piety, f:'t.c. have been a('cepted as ... the
foundation of moral Hfe.
Besides, th e ~upreme God. people have great belief in a numbEr of other Gods and herm's
of yore lik-~ Pabuji, RlImde'Jji, etc. People alf'o believe in evil spiTits which have tc' be appeased.
The vietim has to offer warshjp or s3.crifice at the shrine of the GG:ld cGo('el"ned jn order to appease
the -wrath or to counter-act their evil influence. People go to the shrine of Bhaironji, HanuInanji, etc., so thrut they may not cause dosh (evil eye) and they may remain appeased. Similarly
people go to the t':}mple of Shitla, Goddess of smaH-pox, to gain amnesty from this terrible
dis3as3. Mrtwrian, another Goddes"" hal" constnntly aD evH eye on susceptible -women. Hysteria, etc., arB widely aAcribed to this Goddess. Both Bhairon and Mawrian have thejr priests
and prie9tesses resp8ctivel~"'. The priest is called Bhopa and the priestess Bohpi. In a state
of trancE', the Bhopa and the Bhopi become the mouth-pieces of divinity and prescribe remedies
of ritu'tlistic nature to th? victims.

Bhuts, Bhutnis and the Behmata are the evil spirits ready to play mischjef with ally
innocent person. Paople p'trticularly in the rura.l areas have faith ifJ the capacitjes of profession 0,1
charm'3rs~ who are CEtU'3d frr wh 2'U a victim is pClt;tsessed of an evjl spirit.
The evil spirit is captiva.t2'd by the chat'In ~r within an earthen PGt. which is carried away to be nailed at E'ome secluded
E'p:)t, mmally a bUl"ning ghl'tt. AU0ther m?thod of w~tting relief fr01U the influence of evil spirits
is the ll9.gic or t?n:r, ill which rural people have great belief.
Tantra-Jantra is the magically empowered object, e.g., an amulet (Taviz) which wards
off tho effects of cvj1 eye, b;::lth of mon Arnd spirits. A Muslim 80urcerer win be welcomed to
the house of a, Brahmiu to coatrol au evil spirit or its mischief through jantra or mantra. It is
b3lieved that a sickly child or a hysteri 0 al patient can be cured with the help of jautra or
mantra.
They help C-VE'n in pacifying quarrels.
Mantra is the spoken word having magical powers. They are usually classifiep into two,
the noble and the ign0ble. The effect of sn~ke bite, the influence of evil spirit, etc. can be
nullified by mrmtra of ignoble oroer'. S')m?-tim~8, they are llsed for harming: others. Maran,
Mohan and Uohchata.n ae0 the- ~'" suh-ch"ls'Js of ignoble mzntra,y which are meant for harming,
em"lla.ving the vic;tim and E-xeiting th,':} spjdts for evil pUTposes respectively. The noble order'
c'):1'5ist-; of thos~ m'lntras which a't'e m'3ans of spiritual development rather than magical
pc·,l,C~tic~s.
The G:ZY'1,r'ri mr;tn~ra, for eXcl.mpIR, sbarp~ns the iHtellect and Hanuman Chah"sa
and o~her similat' 8to,~r'1,8 bring s91f-confjdence, courage and deterTIlinatjon.

Dr2am.. app~ara1ice of a king, elephant, sadhu, flower, etc., in dreams is ('onside:r~d a.s
good om~n. Simihlrly, l'U"1rriage, gain in money, or contract with some ancestor is considered
good. If one sees a cobra, it is b31ieved tha.t it brings fortune. Self-flying during drpam.s is
also con'3.idered to be a vt:"ry good Olu,,:,n. If a. aead person appears and gives something, it is

xx:
cunsidered good but if demarids Rnything1 it is considered very bad. Deaths, sickness, fire, etc.~.
during dreams 3,1'e considered bad. Appearance of a camel or buffaloe is also considered ban.

Omen at the time of undertaking a jo'urney:-It is a bad omen if a cat comes in the way
at thetime of undertaking a journey. It is also considered a bad omen if a person with flower
or ghee or with a bundle of fire-wood comes across the person undertaking the journey. The
sight of a widow on an auspicious occasion or before starting on a journey is considered bad.
Sneeze is also considered a ba.d omen at the occasion of starting any work, talk or journey.
It iF! considered a good omen if one comes across a sweeperess, a maidpn or a marri(d woman
while undertaking a journey.
Omen8 in connection. with rain~-Shakuns regarding rainfall and the condition of {,TOpS
for the year are taken on akha teej day. It is considf'red a good om.en for the coming rains if
akha teej is a windy day. It is considered bad if thE'l'e are showers of rains in the month of Ohait
and it is believed that it results in the total scarcity of rains dur.ing the yeal'. Appearance
of clouds on Magh sudi 6 and 7 indieates good signs of rains, Sparrows taking bath in sand
is considered a very good omen for rains.

Other omens:-If a lizard falls on the left hand of a man or the right hand of a. woman,
it is considered, to be a bad omen. If the order is reversed, it is considered to be a good omen.
Quivering of the left side of body of a woman is regarded a good omen, while the quivering
of left part of body of a man is considered bad omen. Appearar, ce of a neel kanth in general
and on Navratri day in particular is considered to be very good. If an ass brays on
the left side, it is considered good, otherwise it is bad. If crows crow and sparks appear in the
fire place, guests are likely to come in the house. Twinkling of the right eye of a man and t~e
left eye of a woman is considered good omen. If the order is reversed, it is bad. Pulsation In
the right arm of a man is considOl.ed good but in the loft it is bad. If theJ;'e is simultaneous
pulsation in both the arms, it is considered to be very good at~d it is believed that the man
would die n renowned warrior's death. The falling of a comet, the voice of peacock in the
night, fluttering of ears of a dog, the sight of an owl, etc., are considered as bad omens.
Pret Yoni:-The soul of a Hindu hovers round the house of thE' deceased for 13 days.
Every day, food is offered to it by the sUl'vivors by feeding crov,rs, cows, dogs, and .the
Brahmins. After the Bhradh OIl the 13th day, the ghost iEl believed to pass on to the next reglO~ ..
If a proper shradh is lJot offered the spirit of the deceased becomes a pret and continues troubling the survivors in dreams and daYknes~. Somt:' rituals, e.g., a katka from the Bhagwat or somo
jantra-mantra promotes the spirit t(' the higher region.
Muhurat:-Every auspicious engagement is governed by the rulE ofmuh'urat. In ord_i~ary
matters, the rule can be waived by a fictitious imitation of the actual work on some auspICIOUS
day. It is the nature of horoscope and the set-up of the stars which determines the muhu~at.
People g~nerany consult Brahmins for '1n'uhurat while undertaking journey, marria.ge, startlll.g
some busihess~ et,c.
. . Disha8hool:-For purposes of travelling, it is believed that the consideration of chand'fa,
yogtn't and dishashool should be kept in mind. Tra.velling in certain direction on particular
day~ is strictly prohibited because every direct-ien or dish a has d1'shashool or the spirit of
malIgnancy on some particular days. In practice, however, an exception is sometimes m~d~.

The traveller starts from his house a day or two earlier alld puts up in a dharmshala. ThIS IS
knoW"IJ as pra'?tkan and is prescribed for ayoiding the iu('onvenience and !'ltrict compliance of the
rule of Diskashool. The speculators, money-lenders and other businesE' communities amollg the
caste HilJdus have faith in yogini.
~

Astrology, Palmistry and Bhaddali:-Astrology is the profession of Brahmins ~nd
Dakots in Bikaner. Dakots claim to have descended from ri."Ihi Danka, who, in collaboratlCn
with one Bhadali, a Shudra girl, composed a book on shak'uns entitled Bhadali after the
name of the Shudra ~irl. People have respect for astrology in Bikaner city.
In the
rural areas, however, it is on

special occasions only that the astrologer is consulted.

.
People, particularly, women, have a general belief that thprp, are evil eyes ready to affect
theIr handsome children and are very anxious to take precautions. A black dot on the forehead or on any otheI' part of the face of the child is put to counter-act the effect of evil eye. They
somet.imes apply soot only to one eye of the child for the purpose. People have faith in the
?apac~ty of snake charmers to force the culprit snake to appear before the victim and suck back
1.ts pOlSOD.

People haye great _veneration for cews, cow dung and her urine (gO'W-mut'l'a.) Every ritual
has cow-dung and gow-mutra as its necessary items. The bulls and coWs are regularly fed in almost
all the ChOWK8 of the city by voluntary contribution. Gow-mutra is supposed to be as sacred as
the water of the Ganga and is administered to a child during the yajnopavit cerem.ony:

Tulsi is the tree Goddess of Hindu ladies. This Goddess is the patroness of their 8uhag.
They all worship tulsi tree a,nd generally have a tulsi plant in the bellse itself. Tulsi fast is a;
common practice among the W0men. People have a great venerfliion fC:f <t[d1Jal' and kheJ"ra
trees also.
Neel kanth, pjgeon and peacock among the birds~ a cleer and a cow anlOng the quadrupeds,
aljd ants among the insects are supposed to be sacred and to offer food to t,hem is considered a.
pieus act.
The dialect of Rajasthani as spoken in Bikaner district is an off-shoot of Eagar Apbhramsa
and i~ known as Bagri.
Apart from the common language of the
(11) Cultural Aspects
people in which works have- heen composed, m,any an outstanding
scholars in ritualistic and theological literature composeo works in
sanskrit. Khadi Boli or Hindi, as It is popularly known, starten claiming recognit.ion frOID. the
beginning of 20th century. A movement for propagation of Hindi Was launched by the intelligentsia of Bikaner under the leadership of Pt. Krishan Shankar Tiwari which culminated in
the establishment of a popular institution known as Nagri Bhandar. Tlle Government of
Eikaner recogniped Hindi as the cfficiaJ language during the tiru~ of Maharaja Shri Ganga
Singhji. Bikaner was one of the foremol!'t states in I.ndia which recogrlised Hindi as official ~at}guage.

Literature=-The literature of this district m,ay be classified into two broad categcries--{l)
literature of the lettered society which was, of necesRity, influenced by feudal traditioT1S
and ideals. Most of such literature was composed under the patronage. of the court particularly during thE" tim.e of MahaJ'aja Anup Sjngji, who was a great patron of arts ,and letters
and was himsBlf a literatuer.

Literature of the people:-This includes the floating mass of bardic literature and all
kinds of songs, proverbs, folk- loro, 'vrtrla8!1 etc. A large .part of this lite'ratllre has either Dot
been discovered by research scholars or has been lost into oblivion. Anup SaT1skrit Library
contains thousands of manuscripts in Sanskrit, Rajasthani and Brii Bhasha, which arc being
catalogued by local scholars and fellow:"! of the Sadul Rajasthani Research Institute under
the guidance of Prof. N. D. Swa.mi, who is one of the leading authorities in Rajasthani
language and literature in the ('ann try. Another manuscript library containing a rich and
rare coI1ection of manuRcripts in Sanskrit and Rajasthani is maintained. by Shri Agar Chand
Nahta, une of the leading
rE"search scholars in Raja,sthani. There are a iJumbf>T of small
mannscript collections in the posFwssioIJ of private individuals nlso, which m.ay be of great
research value. All shade's of opinion 'arid ideology and alm.ost aJI form.s of current literature
have been experimented upon by the writf'r.q of thf' presp,nt generation alFlo.
P~try:-Rikaner claims a leading '('OIA in the croation and
development of the bardin
poetry in Rajaf'!than. This fa-ct, llas also been recognised by Dr. Tf'8S}itori, a great l1uthority
on orient,nl la.nguage8. Bitha Suja, a Charan poet, com.posed the famous wOlk f'-ntitled,
6Chhanda Rao Jait Singh TO', besides a number of other works which are still lying in mannseript
formfl. An other important poet WftS Prithvi Raj Rathore, one of the leading poets of the court of
Akbar and a brother of Raja- Rai Siogji , f Bikaner. Tradition givP8 the credit of iDspiring
Rana Pratap for heroic resiF>tence against Akbar to Prithvi Raj Rathore. 'Baili Krishatl
Rukmini ri' is a famous epic rom,ance which can be placed side by side with any work
belonging to the game ca.tegory in any language. AmoHg other important worl{8 of Dingal
poetry oomposed in this district are 'Dhola Maru ra doha' and 'Kishnia ra Dooha' by a..
Prof. N.D. Swami a.nd 'Dyaldass ri Khyat' whic h is the bed rock of alI subsequent histories of
Eikaner, has been .recently edited by Dr. Dashrath Sharma and Prof.•Taswant Singh Khichi. So
far as the mass of floating literoture is concerned it is either lying inte:rned in the . houses
of Charans, itJ temples and maths or on the lips of Wandering minstrels. The l;oaming
minstrels are the store-houses ef ba,lladB of battles B..ud love.

Among the moctern poets in Raja.stbani are Bharat Vyas, Kanwar Cbander Singh, Bithu
Gopi Dan, Muzli Dhar. Manuj, Gajanand, etc. 'RadIi' and 'Lao' by K~.nwar Charvde-r Singh aToe
fine pieces of litera.ture. The poet has su:cceeded in utilising local atmosphere fOT a classical thf'me.
Chander Dev, Mriknl, K. L. Goswami, and. Pathik a.re the important progressive Hindi poets of .
Bikaner. Ideological saneness and orillinality of expression characterise t,heir compositioD~:

XXII

Among Urdu poets, Bedil commands the. grea.test respect.
delicacy of thought and feelings characterise. his poetry.

Simplicity of

diction and

Sanskrit poetry too has heen composed with considerable success by local poets. Among
the older writers are the Goswamis, some of whom composed quite a large number of works
in theological rituals and dharma shast'l'as. There is, however, not much vitality in modern
Sanskrit poetry in Bikaner.

Blank Verse;-Blank verse has been used for the first time in Bikaner by contemporary
Hindi poets only.
P'I'ose:-Prose is as olrl and as wide in range as poetry ill Dingal-dialect spoken In Bikaner
district. Dya.Idas-ri-Khyat is a, monumental prose work in the dialect of Bikaner ineludiug
some Urdu words. In the time of Maharaja Anup Slnghji, a number of prose works snch as
'Sakh Sarika', 'Sinhasan Battisi' were written. Among modern writf"rs iI. Rajasthani are
La.kshmi Kumari Ohlmdawat, Mul'li Dhar Vyas a.r~d eh. Mal Singh. In SanskrIt there ar0 anumbpr of prose comm'C'ntaries, particularly on tantric literature and astrology by Shivanand
Goswami, Neel Kanth, Udey Ohand. Mani Ram Dikshit etc. Almost all these works are lying
in manuscript form in Anup Sanskrit Library. In Hindi prose, Shri Sha.mbhu Dyal Saxena.,
Oh. M""l Singh, Prof. N. D. Swami are prominent writers.

Prol)erb<;:-Only one compila.tion of Rajasthani provf"rbs entitled 'Rajasthani Kahavtap'
has been brought forth by Prof. N. D. Swami. A huge compilation of Rajasthani proverhs
and mq,XlmS has heen undertaken by the Sadul Rajasthan Research Institute. Some of the
.widely popular proverbs a1'e:-(l) '"Neem na mitko koye, jo sincho gur ghiv syon" (Even ghee
and gur will not make neem Aweet,)., (2) 'Ek Ghar to Dakin hi ta,le hai' (Even the witch spares
one fa,mily), (3) 'Sawan baje suryo, bhadon ri purvali, aasojan nagoran baje, saton sankh
saw:.xi' (if the wind in .the month of Sawan is north-westerly, easterly in the month of Bhadon
and south-easterly in the month of Asoj, the crops wouk) be bumper).
Folk-lore and 8ongs:-It bas almost been a tradition for the singers of folk-lore and
songs to assemble on the nceasioYl of fairs and feRtivals and give perfornlanees of traditional
songs. There are a num.ber of communities like Dholi, Doom, etc., who are well-versed in
folk lore. Another speciality of Bikane-.; folk-lore is Rammat for a full week during Holi ("("lebrations. Important folk ]ores are Amarsingh, Hira Menri etc.
Stories dramas and varlas:-Old stories and vartas from Sanskrit literature were traI1Slat,ed in Rajasi.hani in large numbers. There are other stories also such as 'Ramdeoji ri
baat, Pabuji ri ba'kt, Doongji J owari ri baat, Gogaji,.i baat, Karan Singhji re kanwaran ri baat.
A compilation of the important vartas and stories of Bikaner entitled "Rajasthan ri Batan"
has bsen made by Prof. N. D. Swami and Surya Karan Pareek.
MU8ic:-ClaRsical as well as local forms of music have a.lways been patronised by people
of Bikaller. Among the classical musicians, K'irtanyas hold a prominent pla.ce~ most of wbom
are from the Go swami community. Mirasis, Tawai/s and Bhagtrcns are o1ber l?l'ofessionaI
musicians of the elapsical scbool. Local music may be classified into bhajan and kirtan, heroic
songs by professional bards, love songs of Dholans and songs of badhai. Almost all conventional instrumt:lnts of Indian music and local instruments like dholak, chang, etc., are widely
used. Songs sung to the accompaniment of chang are special features of rural areas of Bikaner
district.
Prom1nent among the classical musicians are Gopal Go swami , Bharat \TT
Pt .•lagan Nath, GuIam l\fohd. etc. Among the rags and raginis popular in this district.
Mana, L'wni, Holi etc.

D:tnce:-The classical dance strictly speaking is not Vf\ry popular in Bikaner district.
There are of conrse poor imitatiolls by amateur dancers and professional dancing girls. Among
some communities like Bhrcngis, San.sis, Meghu;als, etc., women stage dances on marriage and
festive occasions are preva.lent~ which are more an expression of enthusJasm rather than the
display of aTt. The ghumer and dandia dances are staged by Twa11s, Patris and Bhagfan 8 • The
theme of these dances is usually love or feudal themes. Ramlila, raslila and khiyals are also
common features of life in Bika.ner. The Bhartiya, Kala Mandir imparts training in music aud
dancing with considerable success.
Painting:-Painting in Bikaner district has been influenC'ed by Moghul style considerably. Ustas are the traditional painters. This community has produced beautiful 'wall-paintings. Another class of painters is Matherans, who paint sman vessels, dishes, etc., 'with
beautiful designs.

XXIII

IV. ECONOMIC
This district is included within the limits of the unproductive and ill-watered tract which
,(a.) Agriculture
stretches north and north-west
of the Aravalis. The southern ~
General Conditions central and western portions form a plain of the lightest class
of sandy ~oil, broken at short interval~ by ridges of almost pure
sand which in seme parts attain a consioera,ble height. To the south -west of Bikaner lies the
Magra, a level expanse of rather
stony land which is fairly productive When the rainfall
is good. Except for a few places in Kolayat (Magra) tehsil artificial irrigation ip unknown.
The agricultural methods employed are veIY simple. For the Kbarif crops only one ploughing
is given and seed is sown by lnoans of a drill attached to the rear of the plough. The labour of
ploughing is very httle b8ing generally dOlle by a camel who ca,n plough fIve bighas of land a day.
Rotation c·f crops iF: unknown in tIl{'> sandy tracts and the field is sown for two or three years continuously till the soil shows signs cf exhanstion "when YJew land would be broken up or a prE'Yionsly
abanooned field re-cultivated. It is for i,be above reason that a considerable portion of the
individua,} cultivator's holdiLg consists of waste Gr fallow land. Weeding il'i done before the crops
ripen. Thp, cultivators usualI:y take up their abode in buts in their field.s when th(" crops begin
to ripen. They remain there tin thE harvest has been gatl1ered avd takEv to the thraslling floor.
Cultivation of the Rabi crops is prCl.ctkally unknown in tl]js district.
The great cultivating classes among the Hindus are the Jat8 and the Malis (the latter
are not very numerous), an<1 among the MusflJmans the Rath8, Johiyas
Agricultural Classes
and Bhattis, all of whom, ho,\vever, devote more of their time to their
cat.tle than to the tilling of the soil.
For the rest it may he said
that almost everywhere Brahmins, Chamars, Knmhars, Mahajan8, Rajputs, TeJis, etc. will
be found practising ~griculhlre sOIll€'times as their sole llH"an8 of subsistence, and sometinlE'S in
conjullction with their own specific trade.

Crops.
(i) Bajra or spiked millet (Pennisetum typyodeum) is undoubtedly the most impoItant
crop of Rikaner, and its quality is highly laude,d; it can be sown as early as Jeth (l\fay-.Tune),
but the mOI'A usual time is Asarh-Sawan (from the middle of June to that of August), and it
is found that, jf sown aftor the end of July, the yield is poor.
It is neither irrigated nor
manured, but ripens quickly. i.e., within three months, and the out-turn is esbmated at from 2'1
t,(> 31 cwt. pf'l' acrE'. The stalks (karbi). though of no value aE' fodder, are used for thatching
purpoE'es.
(ii) Moth. A species of the kidney bean called moth (Phaseoll!ls aconitifolius) comes
next in importance. It can be sown up to the middle of September, takes about sixty days to
ripen~ and does hest in a light, soil.
The yiE'ld per acre is much the same as that of bajra'J'
and the stalks (guna), leaves and pods (palosi) supply good fodder for camels.
(iii) Jowar or great millet ( Sorghum vulgare) is not very common,
as it requires a
rather stiff soil. It is mor2 generally sown than bajra; takes longer time to come to maturity; and
iEl sometimes irrigated. The out-turn if'! abc-ut four c'wt. 'Per acre.
When mtendEd
' fodder
crop, the seed is sown th:ickly and, as the cro\vded plant.s grow ta II and thin, the
ks are
much less woody than these of a crop gro·wn sppcialJy for seed and are greatly appre~ ..tted ry
cattle.

Fruits and vpgetables :-The principal fruits are the watermelon(matira)and a coarse kind of
-melon called kakri. The former spring into existence during the rain and are so plentiful that
great quantities are thrown to the cattle; the seeds are pounded into a kind of flour which is
mixed with that of cereals.
For this fruit Elphinstone wrote thus:- HIn the midst of so
arid a country'J' the watermelon the most juicy of fruits, is found in profusion. It is really
a subject of wonder to see melons three or four feet in eircumfrence growing from a stalk as
slender as that of a comnlon melon in the dry sand of the desert. They are sown and
perhaps require some cultivation, but they are scattered about, to all appearance as if they
are wild. The natives assert that a large melon suffices to alley the thirst of a horse
.and his rider." Among vegetables. the radish (muli) is most easily raised.

General condition of the agricultll!'ist<:; is good. The economic conditions of the people
havf' greatly improved during the last few years as the prices of grains have gone high. Their
in.debtedness has been wiped off to a great extent. They continue to suffer from old customs
and superstitions.
They spend a lot at the time of marriages, etc. Their houses are often
lcatcha, mostly built of wood and hay with mud-plastering or of clay. They have thorn
fencing attacned to their houses in which they keep their cattle. Their dress is very simple
and they keep few clothes. Their food is simple and often consists of ba}ra. The villageBania is their moneylender as there ar;." no banking facilities in the villages. Most of the
loan is advanced to them without any security. The Government has arranged to give
taccavi loans for the purchase of plough~, repairs to wells, purchase of machinery, etc. But only
a few of them avail of it as tbeyare still backward and conservative in their out-look.
Locust is common in the desert where it finds a congenial soil to lay eggs. The
cultivators protect their crops by digging trenches round their
Agricnltural Pests
fields, in which the hoppers are bUIried. Officers of the AntiLocust Department of the Govt. of India, assisted by the Revenue
a uthorities play a great part in destroying locusts and hoppers. Katra, rats and rust also
appear some time to destroy the crops.
Cattle, sheep and camel form an important part of the wealth of the agricultural
population. In the north-west of the district, where there is little
Live-stock
cultivatjon, livestock is the only source of income. The sheep of Pugal
are said to be of the best type in the district. The oows of Pugal a.re
famous for thoir milk. Sheep are kept principally for their wool. '1'he wool is much prized
especially for carpet making. Attempts are being made to improve the breed of sheep by importing merino rams from Australia.
The camel is used in a variety of ways. The agriculturists
treat him as a member of their family. In ploughing he is more useful than a bullock. He serves
as a water-carrier and a carrier of grain. He is used for ca.rrying load and is let out on hire.
He is the ship of the desert and as such serves for riding. His wool is used in the manufacture of strings, a fair profit is made from the sale of his wool and after his death his skin
is made into Jars or bottles for holding ghee and oil. Bullocks are also used for ploughing.
Bikaner as already stated is quite rich in minerals. The biggest source of gyps:um.
in India is found in ~Tamasar which is about 15 miles from the CIty.
(b) Mines & Minerals
This sourC8 is now exploited by Messrs The Bikaner Gypsum
Limited, who supply more than 1000 tons of gypsum per day to
Sindri Fertilizer Factory, Bihar,. for the manufacture of Ammonium l';ulphate. The quality
of gypsum is very good and it is expected that it will last atleast the next 50 years at the
present rate of exploitation. The same Bikaner Gypsum Limit3d have been contracted
for the exploitation of selinite mines near Lunkaransar. Selinite is a pure form of gypsum.
and is used in the manufacture of plaster of Paris. The company expects to start the
manufacture of plaster of Paris within the next two or three years and will then be able to
supply the total needs of India. Excellent Red Sand Stone is qnarried at Dulmera about 42
miles from Bikaner.
Fullers-earth would play an important part in the mineral and oil Industry in India.
It is found in good quality and quantity near Mudh and Palana. These fields are already
qua.rried by some contractors and it is expected that meth"ds of exploita.tion would improve
as demand increases.
Government run the coal mines near Palana. The total daily pr~duction is about
150 tons all of which is used in the local Power House. Coal or rather lignite of a dark brown
oolour was discovered in 1896, while sinking a well at Palana, about 14 miles south of the
capital. On an analysis madn in the Geological Survey laboratory following results were obtained:Moisture 8·20per~ent., Volatile matter 42'72 pAr cent., Fixed Carbon 39·28 per cent." Ash 9'8O
per cent.; thus indicating a fuel that would burn rapidly on account of large amount of
volatile matter but would he somewhat deficient in heating power. Operations Were.started in 1898 and t.he colliery was connected with the Railway in 189~. The seam is over
20 feet in thickness,. 250 feet below the surface and 50 feet above the water level. more,
than two million tons of coal are said to exist and only in one direction has the depo~it,­
shown signs of exhaustion. The industry has grown steadily year by yea;r. The Qutput m
1906 Was 32,372 tons in 1907 only 28,062: tons and in 1951-52 it.. iff· 40~258
ton-s ..,

xxv

The colliery now gives emploY:lllent to 197 labourers, chiefly Jat8. Okama'l's (or Dheds)
and Thoris. The mineral is, however, of inferior kind, disintegrating rapidly and becoming very
friable When exposed to atmosphere. It is consequently not well fitted for use in locomotives
as the small fragments and dust are liable to choke the boiler tubes.
Large Scale Industries consist of (1) Wool Bailing Press and (2) Mundra Metal
Works Ltd. Small scale Industries found are hand loom manufactur&
(c) Industries, Arts and of woollen cloth, flour mills, oil mills and dal mills.

Manufacture.

The principal manufactures are woollen products, water pakhals and leather kuppiIJ,
or woollen shawls are of very fine texture and the carpets made at the central jail are
wellknown.
~lois'

The principal articles exported are woollen carpets, sugar candy and sajji. The imports
include steel, cloth, piece goods, rice, opium, tobacco and metals.
(d) Trade and Commerce. The export and import are carried by rail. Camels are used for conveying goods to the interior of the district from railway stations. The
chief centres of trade are Bikaner and Nokha. The principal trading castes are Agarwal.
Maheshwari and Oswal Mahajans, Khatris and Brahmins. There are nO commeroial fairs or
weekly market days.
There is an aerodrome at Nal near Bikaner but there is no regular service. The dist(e) Communications.
rict is connected by rail with Delhi, Jodhpur, Jaipur, Ganganagar
Railway.
and punjab. List of railway stations is given in appendix A.
The bus services plying in the .district ar-~ (1) Bikaner to Sri Kolayat and Bhap and
(2) Bikaner to Jasrasar (tehsil Nokha via Nokha). A tar road connects
Roads.
Bikaner with Kolayat and Gajner. A pacca road connects Bikaner with
Nokha and Sujangarh. There is fair weather road from Bikaner to
Pugal 58 miles. There are no dak bungalows or rest houses at any of these places except
Bikaner where there is a dak bungalow and a circuit house. Dhar11'lshalas, are found at
almost every railway station, e.g., Nokha, Napasar, Deshnoke, Lunkaransar, Bikaner and
Surpura. Besides motors, bullocks and camels are the only means of public conveyance.
There is a Central Government telegraph office at Bikaner and railway telegraph offices
at every railway station mentioned in appendix A. A list of post
Telegraph and Post
offices is given in appendix B. There is a local telephone in the city
offices.
of Bikaner. Sri Kolayat and Gajner are connected with a telephone.
The city of Bikaner is a station on trunk telephone.
The worst famines were experienced in 1848, 1856, 1896 and 1900.
experienced was in 1939.

The only flood

<I> Famines and floods etc.

v. Administration
The present Bikaner district is the Nizamat Sadar of the former Bikaner State and oon- .
siBts of four tehsil'> (1) Bikaner (2) Lunkaransar (3) Nokha and, (4) Kolayat (Magra). The first
two of the tehsils constitute tIle Y'orth and the last two the south sub-division of the district.
The Collector who is also the District Magistrate is assisted by two Assistant Collectors who are
the sub-divisional Magistrates. The sub-divisional Magistrates are both stationed in Bikaner.
The tehsildars~ howe\Ter, live at tbe tehsil headquarters. They enjoy 2nd class or 3rd class magisterial powers.~
The whole of the former Bikaner State now forms the Bikaner division of Rajasthan
and iB divided into three districts of Bikaner, Ganganagar and Churu. The headquarters of the
CommiBsioner are at Bikaner.
The average annual land revenue demand of the district is Rs. 142,617.from the Khalsa
area. a.nd Rs. 64,533 as tribute from the Jagi·r area.
Bikaner and Chnru form one sessions division with the seat of the Session Judge at
Bikaner. He is also the District Judge and is assistod by a civil judge and a munBiff.

XXVI

VI. Public Works
... _
The Public works department is under an Executive Engineer. He looks a.fter the ,buUd...
In'gs' and roads. There are a large number of Government quarters in the city and the
number of Government buHdings in tne district is quite large.
The electric supply of the district alAd the water supply in the city are owned by tho
-Two executive engineers look after this work. The Bikaner Electric Power
House is the 2nd largest power hoW':;e in Rajasthan. It supplies electricity to the whole of
Bikaner Division 'except Ganganagar which has its own power house. Many of the import-ant
villages in the district are supplicd with clectric current. The water supply in t.he cjty is as yet
pl"actically free and cO:r;lsidering that water has to be pumped out from a depth of about 300
fe.e,t the expenditure on this account is cOD.siderable.
Qov~rnment.

VII. Protection
Bikaner cC'ntains the range headquarter of the Deputy .;Inspector General of Police. The
superintendent of police, Bika1:Jer also supervises over the whole of
}Jolice.
the Bikaner division of the northern railway. The superintendent
of police is helped by 4 deputy superintendents. There are 17 polioe
stations and 18 police out-posts in the district. (List is in appendix C).
Incidence of crime is comparatively low in Bikaner.
theft is the most frequcnt.

Amon gst serious crimE'S, camel

The only jail iR at Bikaner which is called· District Jail, Bikaner.

Jail.

vln. Education

Bikaner is the headquarters of the Director of Education, Rajasthan. There aJ;'e one
degree college, t·wo IrJtermediate col1ege~ and ('ne GovernmEnt Inter College for \VOmell and a.
Te-achers' Training College in the city of Bikaner. There aro ten high schools in the eity and one
uJ the rural a.reas of the district. There arc ~ overDl middle schools lower middle schools and
primary schools. There is no separate arrangements for 1 he educati0D of scheduled castes.
Details are given in. appcndix D. There is also one orphanago and infirmary at Bikaner.

IX. Public Health.
The climate of Bikaner is quite healthy and except for typhoid and malaria which are
rlisea~es are infrequent.
Plague and cholera are almost unknown in
these parts. Bikaner, however, pOSSesses three hig and very well equipped hospitals. They are
the T. B. Hospital I3,lJd the two Prince Vijey Singh Memorial Hospitals for men and women.
These hospitals are staffed with well trained specialists "who provide modern treatm~nt including
those with X'ray, Radium and other electrical appliances. There are also dispensaries in the
city and
other jmpcrtant toW~)S such
as Gangashahr, Lunkaransar~ Napasar, Kolayat,.
Deshnoke and Himatsar. (List in appendix E).
ep~demic, other tropical

X. Local Self Government
For the city of Bikaner there is a municipality.
Bhina.sar, Lunkaransar, Napasar and Nokha.

Town municipalities are established at

Village Panchayats are established in 33 villages (List appendix F). Except the municipality of Bikaner, all are self supporting. Elections are held on the basis of adult franchise.
The municipalities look after the, sanitation of the towns, cleaning of roads, lanes and stree1i
lighting. Tho municipality of Bikaner has to look to the State for a grant in aid. Its income. is
400,000/- and expenditure 700.000/- per annum.

XI. Miscellaneous
railway.

Bikaner also contains the divisional headquarters of the Bikaner division of the northern
There is a big railway workshop in Bikaner.

Bikaner is also the sea.t of the Deputy Commissioner of Civil Supplies and the Deputy
Commissioner of Excise and Customs.

xxV'u:

Appendix A.
--

List of Railway Stations in Bikaner District

1.
4.

7.
10.
13.
16.
19.
22.

Bika.ner JD.
Dcshnokc
Lunkaransar.
Duhnera.
Jagdevwala.
Lallgarh.
Gajner.
Nokha

2.
5.

8.
11.
14.
17.
20.

Na:pa.sar.
Surpura.
Mahajan.
Dhirera.
JamSar.
Nal.
Kolayatji

3.
6.

Palana.
Chilo.
9. Adansar.
12. Malkisar.
15. Khanasar.
18. Durbari
21. Gadhwala.

Appendix B.
Name of l'ost Offices in Bikaner District
1.

4.
7.
10.
13.
16.
19.
22.
25.
28.
31.

Bikaner Head Office.
Bikaner City.
Lalkar Bikaner.
Bhinasar.
Himatsar.
Jaitpur.
Jasrasar.
Lunkaransar.
Mandi Jakat (Bikaner)
Palana.
Sri Kolayatji.

2. Kote Gate, Bikaner.
5. Bikaner Kacheri.
8. Gangashahr.
11. Deshnoke.
14. Dherera.
17. Jamsar
20. Kalu.
23. Mahajan.
26. Mensar.
29. Surpura.

3.
ti·

9.
12.
15.
18.
21.
24.
27.
30.

Rani Bazar Bikaner~
Lallgarh Palace Bikaner.
Nokha.
Dulmera.
Gajner Palace.
Jhajoo.
LaUgarh.
Malkisar.
Napasa};.
Udramsar.

Appendix C.
List of Police Sta.tions in Bikaner District.
1.

P. S. Division

cA'

3.

P. S. Division

~C'

5.
7.
9.
II.
13.
15.
17.

P. S. Division Gangashaha.r
P. S. Division Diatra.
P. S. Division Pugal.
P. S. Division Gajner.
P. S. Division Deshnoke
p. S. R. Sadulgarh.
P. S. R. Bikaner.

2.
4.
6.
8.
10.
12.
14.
16.

P. S. Division 'B'
P. S. DiviSion
~D'
P. S. Division Nokha.
P. S. Division Mahajan
P. S. Division Gersar.
P. S. Division Lunkaransar.
P. S. Division Napasar.
P. S. R. Ratangarh.

Appendix D.
List of Educational

Institutions.

Govern men t High Schools for Boys &

1.
3.
5.
-7.

Sadul Public High School, Bikaner
City High School, Bikaner.
Mehta Mulchand High School, Bikaner
Jawahar High School, l3hinasar

Girls in Bikaner District.

2.
Sa-dul High School, Bikaner.
4. Fort High School, Bikaner
6. S. B. Chopra High School, Gangashahr
8. --Sri Karni High SchooI~ Deshnok.

Special Institutions.
1.

Orphanage & Infirmary, Bikaner

Aided Special Institutions.
1.

Sadul Pushkarna. High School, Bikaner.

2.

B. K. Vidyalaya, Hibner.

Government Middle Schools for Boys.
1.
3.
6.
9.

Bhinasar Middle School.
U dramsar.
Gajner.
Nokha.

12.

2.

New Middle School, Bikaner.

4.
7.
10.
13.

Sadul Military School, Bikaner.

Bhatter Middle School.
Devikundsagar.
Lunkaransal·.
.
Himatsar (Not functioning)

5.
8.
11.

Vdasar.
Na-pasar.
Kalu.

Government Middle School for Girls.
1.
3.
5.

Maharani Girls Middle School. 2. Lady Elgin Girls Middle School.
City Girls School,
Bikaner.
4. Girls Middle School, Bursagar.
Girls Middle School, Industrial area.

.
Aided Middle Schools for Boys.
1.

Bikaner

1.

City.

S. K. Vidyalaya.

Aided Schools for Girls.
1.

Bikaner

L

City.

Bharav Ratan Matri Pathsala

Appendix E.

LiSt of Hospitals~ Dispensaries etc. of Bikaner District.
A. Hospitals and Dispensaries
1.
3.
5.
7.
9.
II.
13.
15.

2.

City Dispensary No. 1.
Fort Out-Door Dispensary.
Railway Workshop Dispensary.
Gangaahahr Dispensary.
N okha. Dispensary
Napasar Dispensary.
Palana.
Dispensary.
Sri Kolayat Dispensary.

4.

6.
8.
10.
12.
14.

City Dispensary No.2.
Lallgarh Hospital.
Central Jail Dispensary.
Deshnoke Dispensary.
Gajner Dispensary_
Lunkarar.Lsar Dispensary.
Himatsar
Dispensary.

B. Other Institutions.
1.
2.
3.

Maternity & Child Welfare Centre,. Bikaner.
City Vaccination Centre,. Bikaner.
Public Health Training Centre, Bikaner.

Appendix F.

List of Gram Panchayats of Bikaner District.
Bikaner TehsiJ
1.
4.

7.
10.
13.
16.
19.

Palana.
Udasar.
Gusaisar.
Udramsar.
Barsingsar.
Hussangsar.
Surdhana.

2
5.

8.

II.
14.

17.
20.

Gadhwala.
N orangdesar.
Nal.
Kanasar.
Belasar.
Tajrasar.
Jamsar.

3.
6.
9.
12.
15.
18.
21.

Runia,was.
Pemasar.
Pugal.
Ramsar.
Kilchu.
Kharda.
Jam.alsar.

XXIX

Nakha TehsiZ
Surpura.
Kakda.
Badnu.
Lalamdesar Bada &
Rasisar.

22.
25.
28.
31.
34.

Chhota.

23.
26.
29.
32.
35.

Jasrasar.
Himatsar.
Mundsar.
Sadasar.
Gajrupdesar.

24. Panchu.
27. Kuohor.
30. Kesardesar.
33. Mukam.
36. Ankhisar.

T ehsil Lunkaransar
37.
40.
43.

46.

44.

Khokhrana.
Khakri.
Mahajan.

39.
42.
45.

Kalu.
Kapurisar.
Jaitpur.

48.

Kolyat.

49.

Ga,jner.

38.

Seikhsar.
Kujati.
Sejrasar .
Kumana.

41.

Tehsil Kalayat
47.

Jhajhu.

Appendix G.
statement showing details of palana Colliery, Bikaner, District.
Total Output.

Bjkaner,.

P. H.
Tons.

Tons.

40,258

39,023

Desp.atohes
Colliery
Others.
Consumption
Tons.
Tons.

763

472

Profit.
RUp3~f;.

I.59,376/~

Average
labours
workin.g
daily.

SCOPE" of
improvement.

197

If more shafts
are sunk ano
equipped mOre
~oal can be
raised and more
rt::venue earned.

REVIEW OF POPULATION FIGURES
BIKANER DISTRICT
1.

The district of Bikaner is situated in the south-west of Bikaner Division, which IS
the northernmost part of the newly formed State of Rajasthan.
It
Introduction.
lies between the parallels of 27° 15' and ~H" 5' north latitudes and 7;:!'O 20'
and 7·1,0 ~O' east longitudes. It is bounded on the north by Bhawalpur
State (Pakistan) on the ea,,,,t L--.y the District of Churn; on the south and south-east by the Districts
of Nagaur and Jodhpur and on t,ile ",vest by J aisahner District and Bhawalpur State (Pakistan).
The Indo Pakistan border which extends over about 37 riles lies in the tebsil BikGl~ner.

2.

The district is divided into 4 tehsils.

There are 18 Poliee Stations and 18 out-posts.

This district, consists of 1 city, G towns and 490 vinages~ ha'dng a population
of 3,30,3:29 persons (males 171,279 females 159.0: 0) of whom as many
Population.
as 148.988 i. e. 45'1
per cent reside in urban \mitK ftl1d the rest in
ruralolles. This district stands 21st in lY~Spect of population anlong
thH districts of I:tajasthan vide Annexure "A". The rnajority of ,.cillages is of the Rrnallest size
with a popUlation below 500 persons. ThE' only city is Bikaner, tOWl1R are six (]) Ganga-Shahar
(2) Bhinagar (~-3) Napasar (4) Deshnoke (5) Nokha·Mandi and (6) _Lnnkaransar.
3.

4. The population of this district as composed on March I, 1951, according to
Census of 1941 was 30::;,836 (males 162,856 and feluales 140,980). ThE' last decade has witnessed
an increase of 26,493 or 8'7 per cent. vide A_nnexure "E". Its growth :is belo"\v the average
growth of Rajasthan by 5'2 per cent. The growth in urban units has been 8-9 per
cent
while that in the rural units is 8'6 per cent.
5.

The area of this district as supplied by the Surveyor General for India is 8,446'6 sq.
miles.
It thus covers 6'5 per cent of the total area of the State and
Area and Density.
stands 4th in respect of area when compared with the other districts of
Raje_sthan vide Annexure "C". The Dhoector of Land Records
Rajasthan, states the area of this district to be 10,150 sq. miles. It has a density of 39
persons per square mile. It was 36 in 1941. Its density is much below the average density of
Rajasthan which is 117 and also that of Bikaner Division (64) of which it forms a part
vide A_nnexures "D" and "F" .
6.

The number of occupied houses in this district is 55,305 which are inhabited by
65,857 households (3].791) hO-:'lses occupied by 34,301 households
Occupied houses, house- in rural areas and 23,514:: houses o0cupi~d hy 31~55G households in
holds, and sex ratio.
urban units).
7. The number of persons per occupied house is G (6 in rura,l and () in urban units).
The same was the proportion in 1941. The average number of persons in a household is 5 in
rural and 5 in urban units. The household population of the district is 330,245 (181,257 in
rural and 148,988 in urban units) i. e., only 84 persons less than the total population. This
last figure represents the hcuseless persons and inmates of institutions etc. The number of
females per thousand
males in this district is 9~9 in total population and the same in
household population. It waS 866 in 1941 vide Annexure "E". In the rural units it is 905 and in
the urban it is 958.
8.

Literacy.

,

Number of literates per thousand

If

The number of total literates is 36,3S2 i. e.; 110 per thousand (males 29,201 or 170
per thousand and females 7.181 or
45
per thousand).
The
condition is different in rural from urban units as depicted in the
inset table.

Rural
Urban

Persons

Males

Females

31-4
250·n

54·0
316·1

6·4
910

I
~

!

I

The strength of persons depending directly or indirectly upon agriculture as their
principal means of livelihood is 17 5~764. They form 53' 2 per cent
of of the total population. But if we take out of consideration those
Principal
means
-who are not directly in touch with land i. e.~ non-cultivating owners
Livelihood.
of land and their dependants, the percentage of actual agricu1turists
and their dependants comes to 52' 7. Among agriculturists the largest percentage is that of

9.

2

cultivators of land wholly or mainly owned and their dependants, who form 34'5 per cent.
Cultivators of lanrl wholly or mainly unowned and their dependants rank second fornling
a percentage of 17'9 onl;v. The cultivating labourers and their dependant~ and non- c-;_11tivatillg
owners fGnn 0'21) and O· 5 per cent rospuctively.
10_ l~nn-agricultural category forIns 46' 8 per cent t_ e. people depending on ":-;ervices
and :n1.isceIlan0ons sources" form .2~ . '7 pt'r nent of tho general population.
Tra,ders are 12':3
per cent_
Indu!';teiali".;t<, '- '_Hnprise (). D per cent. Tril,usp0l't industry supports ~. 9 per cent only.
11. In 'llle rural units the o,gI"icultural classes fornl 9]'0 per cent. of the popuhd)ioll and
non-agricultural classes 9 per ('t~nt, i. e., nultivat,n:s of o\-~'"-H":cl 1a11. .1 and their dependants form
60'1 per cent.
Culti "TainTS of nnnwnf,d l1'\nd and th[~lr dependants form 29'!) per cent.
Cultivating labourers and cheir dept,udantN form O· 3 per CDut. while the l1011-cult,ivatillg (·"\Yner.·~
of land are ~ )'7 "),'1:' cent.
J 2.
Of tho
non-3.gricuJtu1.'al ~'ateg(Jry:in the rural a,roa,s~ the largest number belongs to
the "otheT
ser\':ces and misceHan(c,ous r-lources", b0ing 4' 6 per
('ont. and those (lopeD.ding
upon trad(:-" are 2·a per c-c~nt. IndustrialiRts form 1-S per cent. 'l'he nUlllber of persons en,qaged
in Transport Industry is very iuco]]sid(\rable llein~': ~\Vell less than one per cent.
J ~1.
In the urhan units Lhe owner l'uHiYators and the cultivators of unowned Ian dare
3-4 pel' cent. each of the total urban population. The cultivating labourers and
the
non-cnltivating owners of land are about O' 2 per cent. each. th~~ largest group depend upon
Hother servjces and JnisecllalJ.oou8 sonrees" forming 4~' 2 per cent. Traders bt'ing 2t'5 per cent. and
Industrialists]:1 0 per cent. Only G' 1 reI' cent. of the population arc engagell ill 'Transport Industry.
o

]4.

Amongst the

owner cultivators of this distdct 32'7 per cent. are self-supporting,
10'2 per cent. are earning dependants and 57'l per cent are non-earning
Dependence
dependants. Out of th(~ persons who are t'ngaged in cultivation of
unowned land 53'5 per cent. arE'- self-supporting, 32-'; Vel' ,·ent. are
non-earning dependants and 14'1 per cent. are earning dependants.
AnlOngst the cultivating
labourers 36'5 per cent. are self-supporting, 59'2 per eent. are non-earning deppndants and 4'3
percent are earning dependants_ Out of t he non-cultivating owners of land and those receiving
agricultural rt'nt 29'6 per cent. aYe Ae If-supporting, 64-4 per cent are non-earning dependants
and 6'0 per cent_ are earning dependants_
15. Out of the persons employed in industries i. eo, production other than cultivation
29'9 per cent_ are self-supporting, 6~'n per cent are non-earning dependants and 4-5 per cent. are
earning dependants. Amongst traders ~t)'8 per cent_ are self-supporting, 68'6 per cent. are
non-earning dependants and 1'6 per cent are earning dependants.
Out of the persons whose
means of livelihood is Transport, 26'6 per cent. are self-supporting, 72'4 per cent_ are non-earning
dependants and one per cent. carnin g dependants.
Out of the persons whose
means of
livelihood is 'other services and miscellaneous sources' 28' 1 per cent. are self-supporting, 70' 5
per cent. are non-earning dependants and 1'4 per cent are earning dependants_
16. Amongst the owner cultivators; 14'3 per cent. supplement their income by following
secondary occupations.
Similarly amongst the cultivators of unowned
Secondary
means
of land 24 per cent. follow secondary occupations to supplement their
livelihood.
inco:tne and amongst cultivating labourers and rent receivcI:s or
non-cultivating
owners 7'2
and
11'1
per
cent.
respectIvely
follow secondary occupations.
17. In the non-agricultund population 8'3 per cent, of the Industrialist
class follow
secondary occup['~tions and [l.l11ongst traders only 3'4 per cent. do so, whereafl amongst those who
are engaged in Transport 2-16 per cent. follow subsidiary occupations_
In the class "other
services and miscellaneous sources,' they are 4·56 per cent.
18. Out of the sdf-supporting persons of non-agricultural classes 3'2 per cent. of the
industrialists are en1.ployers t 16'~ per cent em.p1oyees and 80'5 per cent.
Economic status:
art.' independent workers. Alllongst traders 2'1 per eent. aTe eIuployers,
4'0 per cent employees and 93'3 per cent. independent workers. In the
Transport class 0'86 per cent. are enlployers, 81'92 per cent. are elnployeet-l and 17-22 per cent. are
independent workers_
In the ·other servines and miscellaneous sources' group 0'05 per cent. are
employers~ 67'98 Ennployees and 31'97 independent workers.
19. Economically inaetive pcrsonH can be grouped into two categories. (1) Those
who earn their livelihood without any activity e. g. pensioners. stipend
Economically
inactive holders, receiver's of rent from land or buildings or interest, and (b) those
tJersons.
whose ftctivities are uneconomic in their nature ~. g. ueggars, prostitutes
etc.
The number of such person.s in this district is 871 (769
n1.ales
and 102 females).
T~oy fonu 0'26 per cent. of the total population of the district_
'Their
further details are gIven in District Economic Table B. III (Employers, Employees and
Independen 'J \ V orkers in Industries and Services by Divisions and Sub -divisions.)

3
20.

The principal langua.ge of this district is Marwari which is really a dialect of
Rajasthani. It is spoken by 299,899 persons i. e., 90'8 per cent.
Of
Language.
the other languages spoken in this district Bagri or Shekhawati is
spoken by 3 ,755 persons or 1'1 per ceut of the population. Speakers
,of Rajasthani are I,Z~;{, or
4 per Gent. Those who speak Bikaneri and Rathi are 769 and 667
i. e., 0'23 and 0'2 pel' ceut. respectively. Hindi, Prdu and Brij Bhasha (Western :Hindi) is spoken
by 17,1~3 persons or ""'2 per cent. Speakers of Punjabi, and Siudhi are 3,420 and 2,350 or
1'03 and 0'8 per cent.. respectively. The Dum bel' of speakers of other languages h~ insignificant
being nluch less th:.111 one per cent.

°

21.
Religion.

A vast majority of thu people of this district are l:findus, being 81 ';J per cent.
next come l\'[uslims who are 11 -3 p<'r cent. .Tainisnl r::tnks third
baving 7 -2 per rent. of the population as it"' followers, Sikhs are O· 2
Pt-]'
l·t~nt. Christians and Zoroastrians
combined form lllllCh less than

1 per cent.

Scheduled

Sl·hcduled Castes population enumerated in this district is 4] ,913 1:. e., 1.2 -6 per
CPllt. of the total population and there is none belonging to ;"::cheduled
Tribes. A list of sch(:tiulcd castes notified bv the Governnlent of India
Castes.
is appellded (Annexure "0").
.

23.

Of the persons enumerated in thi::5 district 91 -4 per cent _ are born in the district
itself, while those born in other districts of Rajasthan are 5'2 pAr cent.
Migrants.
For District-wise details of the above items see District T'able "D. IV,"
(luigrants). Persons born in India outside Rajasthan are 2,683 1. e. 0'9
per cent and those born in countries in Asia beynnd India are 5,060 £. e., 1'5 per cent. only. Most
of them were born in areas now known h8 Pakistan and have come here as displaced persons.

24.

The number of displaced persons in this district is only 5,012. Only 2 perbons have
immigrated from East Pakistan, (1 in 1947, and 1 in 1949),
and the
Displaced persons.
remaining from West Pakistan, 3,649 in 1947,1,276 in 1948 and 85
in 1949). Majority of them i. e., 2,432 or 48 - 5 per cent. are Traders,
1.707 or 34-1 per cent. earn their livelihood by 'other services and miscellaneous sources,'
Industrialists rank third being 597 or 12 per cent. Those who are engaged in Transport are
194 or 3-9 per cent. Non-cultivating OWllers of land are 32 or 0'6 per cent. Cultivators of owned
and unowned land are 18 and 28 or 0'3 and O' 5
per cent. respectively while cultivating
labourers are 4 or 0'1 per cent.
25. Amongst agricultural population 12 - 3 per thousand are literates in accordance with
the definitioll prescribed for the Census. Persons who have passed
Educationa.l Standard.
the J\1iddle School Exanlination and Matriculates are O' 4 and O' 3 per
thousand respectively. Those who have passed Intermediate in Arts
or Science or are graduates in Arts or Science or have degrees or diplomas are 25, l3 and 475 in
number which works out asO'l, 0'07 and :":-7 perthollsandrespectively_ Therejs only
one post-graduate. Those holding teaching qualification are 0 - 1 per thousand only. All others
who have acquired higher educational qualifications than these number :2: - f) per thousand
roughly among the agricultural population. In the non-agricultural popUlation 175 per thousand
are literates. Thosp w-ho have passed j\,iiddle School Examination and ~latriculates are 15' 1
and 15' 9 per thOllQand respectively.
Those ,"vho have passed Intermediate in Arts or Science
a.nd hold Digrees or Oiplo:rnas 8.nd are CracllJ.ates in Arts or Science are 3 - 3, II- 9 a'f\-d 3 - H per
thousand respectivoJy
POf3t-graduates are O· 6 per thousand.
Those holding
Teaching,
Engineering and ~e-gal qualifications are 0 - 3, o· 1 and o· 7 per thousand 1.'0B)'ectively. Those
holding Medical, Agricultura.l. Voterinary and Comnwrcial qualification are O· 3, O' 03, 0'01 and
0-05 per thousand ro:o;pectivdy. AU others who have acquired higher educational qualifications
than mere litcracy number G -5 per thousand roughly among the non-agricultural population.
Among the Agricultural population 3 - 6 per thousp...nd have acquired bigh(:r kno,yledge than
mere literacy, antI amongRt the non-agricnltural population this number is 46'4 per thousallr1.
26.

In

this dist.rict the total number of persons afflicted by infirmities (the blind, the
de£',-f-mutes, the insane and the lepers) Dre 72-!c i. c. 2 - 1 per thousand.
Infirmities.
BlindneRs i~ the most prominent, the number being 51;> i. c .• l' 5 per
thousand, persons afflicted by rest of the infirmities are 0 G per
thousand. 60' 4 per cent. of the total blind persoIls are in the age group 5fi and over. Similarly
17-2 per cent. of the total deaf-mutes, 24'4 per cent. of the total insane and 35 per cent. of
the total lepers are in this age group.

4

ANNEXURE '''A''

Districts of Raj astban arranged by Population.
S.

Districts

No.

Total

Rural

Urban

1

Jaipur

1,656,097

1,IB6,885

469~212

2

Udaipur

1,191, 2:32

1,043,253

147,979

3

Bharatpur

907,399

757,177

150,222

4

Al war

861,993

763,155

98,838

5

Kotah

766,198

639,:230

126,968

6

Sawai Madhopur

765.17~

668,943

96,229

7

Nagaur

763,829

664,250

99,579

8

Bhilwara. _

727,356

659,851

67,505

9

Jodhpur

691,786

46.a,399

228,387

10

Sikar

677,782

529,498

148,284

11

Pali

660,856

570,727

90,129

12

Ganganagar

630,130

539,217

90,913

13

Jhunjhnnu

588,621

448,295

140,326

14

Chittorgarh

t>87" 724

5J4,570

63,154

15

Churn

523,276

338,174

185,102

16

Jalore

459,467

431,416

28,051

17

Barmer

441,368

408,601

32,767

18

Tonk

400,947

332,268

68,679·

19

Jhalawar .0

373,810

330,826

42,984

20

Banswara

356,559

3:l6,874

19,685

21

Bikaner

..

330,329

181,341

148,988

22

Dungarpur

308,243

286,501

21,742

23

Hundi

280,518

232,760

47,758·

24

Sirohi

237,362

209,502

27,860

25

.Taisalmer

102,743-

94 .. 717

8~O2&·

----

5

ANNEXURE "B"

Districts of Rajasthan arranged according to
Percentage of Growth of Population

No.
1
2
·3

4
5
6
7
8

9
10
II
12
13

Growth

Growth

s.

District
Jaipur
Tonk
Barmer
Jodhpur
Sirohi
JhunjhllIlu
Pali
Banswara
Gang Cl,nagar
Udaipur
Nagaur
Bhilwara
Jalore

.--------~-----~

Actual

Percentage

+365,,537

d-: 76,202

± 78,,071
+118,103
:+-: 40,071

+ 97,750

+105,270

+ 56,646
=+- 96,156

+178,051
+107,452
:t-, 96,262
.+ 59,897

+28'3
+23'5
+21'5
+20'6
+20'3
+19'9
+18'9
-1-18-9
+18-0
+17-6
+]6-4
-1- 1 5'3
+15'0

S.

r - - - " _ -"---;:::::\

No.

District

14:
15
16
17
18
19
:20
21
22
23
24
25

Churu
Chittorgarh
Bundi
Dungarpur
Sa wai lVladhopur,
Jaisalmer
Sikar
Bikaner
J'halawar
Kotah
Bharatpur
Alwar

Actual Percentage
,+68,148
+66,854
.+31,144
+33,961
.+82,647
9,497
+61,868
+26,493
+26,784
+39,041
+46,058
+16,602

+

+15'0
+12·8
+12-5
+12·4
+12'1
+10'2
+10'0
8'7
7'7
5'4
+,5'3
+ 2'0

+
+
+

----

ANNEXURE

(-'C~'

Districts of Rajasthan arranged according to Area

S.
No.
1
2

3
4
5
6
7
8
9

10
11
12

13

District
Jaisalmer
Barmer
Jodhpur
Bikaner
Ganganagar
Udaipur
Nagaur
Churu
Jaipur
Jalore
Kotah
Pali
Bhilwara

S.

Area in square
miles

No,

District

Sawai IVfadhopur
Tonk
16 Al war
17 Chittorgarh
18 Bharatpur
19 Sikar
20 Jhalawar
21 Jhllnjhunu
22 Bundi
Banswara
23
24 Sjrohi
2G Dungarpur
14
15

15,967'5
10,150'5
9,434'4
8,446'6
8,225-0
6,957'5
6.898'8
6,512-4
6,295'4
4,923'6
4,784·6
4,750'7
4,671'5

Area in square
nliles
4.203'8
3,581-6
3,245-3
3,231-2
3,132-6
2941'9
2,311'2
2,310-5
2,138'9
1,953-8
1,671'1
1,466'3

_------Total

130.206·7
------~-

----

6
ANNEXURE ·'D"

Districts of .Raj asthan arrangell according to Denliity per square mile
with variation aince 1941-

S.

District

No.

1941

1951

Variation

S.
No.

+15
, 6

14

1941

1951

Varia._
tion

Sirohi

118

142

+24

District

1

Bharatpur

275

290

2

Alwar

260

266

.-r

15

Pali ..

117

139

+22

3

Jaipur

205

263

+58

l6

Bundi

117

131

+14

4

Jhunjhunu

212

255

+43

17

"_ronk

91

]12

+21

5

Sikar

209

230

+2J

18

Nagaur

95

III

+16

6

DungaI'pur

187

210

+23

19

Jalore

81

93

+12

7

Sawai .Madhopur

162

182

-1-:20

20

Churu

70

80

+10

8

Chittorgarh

161

182

+21

2]

Ganganagar

65

77

+12

9

Banswara

154

182

+28

22

Jodhpur

61

73

+12

10

Udaipur

146

171

+-25

23

Barmer

36

43

+7

11

..Thalawar

150

162

+12

24

Bikaner

36

39

'+ 3

12

Kotah

152

160

d-: 8

25

Jaisalmer

6

6

13

Bhilwara

135

156

+21

ANNEXURE "'E"

Districts of Rajasthan arranged according to Preponderance of females

s ..

District

No.

No. of females
per 1000 males in

S.

r- -- _'- .A:.-- - ~

No.

]!)41

]951

District

No. of fetnaks
per
1000 males in
,--- _ _ _ J.... _ _

~

1941

1951

1

Dunga.rpur

970

1,003

14

Kotah._

919

926

2

Ban'Swara

:196

983

15

Tonk

903

925

3

Sirohi

047

16

Jaipur

914

919

4

Sikar

972

17

Jalore

921

913

5

Udaipur

960

]8

Bundi

918

913

6

Chi ttorgctrh

058

19

Jodhpur

887

899

7

Jhunjhunu

881

:~o

Alwar

890

896

8

Jhalawar

!J52

9)2

21

1Sawai ]\'[11,dhopur

884

879

9

Pali

943

946

2~

Banner

869

869

10

Churn

nus

9~i9

23

Ganganagar

814

836

11

Nagaur

1112

936

24

B~- aratpur

840

8G5

12

Bhilwara

943

934

25

J aisalmer

807

813

13

Bikaner

866

92D

..

'4

ANNEXURE

"~RH __

DenEity of population

per square mile in the Administrative
Divisions of the state of Rajasthan
Density per square mile

Division
1

.Taipur

228

2

Udaipur

173

3

Kotah

154-

4

Bikaner

64

5

Jodhpur

62

ANNEXURE HG"

Scheduled Castes
Published in the Notification'!) Gazette of India, Extraordinary
Part II, Section 3, No. 27, dated 11th August, 1960,
Order No. S. B. O. 610, dated 6th Sept., 1950.
1 Adi Dharmi

12 Chf'Jmar

23 Kapadia SanBi

3jl Nut

2 Aheri

13 Chura

24 Khanga-r

35 Pasi

3 Badi

14 Dabgar

25 Khatka

36 Raigar

4 Bagri

15 Dhankia

26 Kooch Band

37 Ramdasia

5 Bajgar

16 Dheda

27 I-Coria

38 Rawa.l

6 Bansphor

17 Dome

28 ICunjar

39 Sarbhangi

7 Bargi

18 Gandia

29 l\1adari

40 Singiwala.

8 Bawaria

19 Garancha Mehtar

30 J.\1ajhabi

41 Sansi

9 Bhand

20 Godhi

31 Mehar

42 Thori

10 Bhangi

21 Jati;:l,

32 Mehtar

43 Tirgar

II Bidakia

22 Kalbelia

:~3

4-4 Valmikj

Mochi

8

SCHEME OF CENSUS TABLES

Census Tables prepared this time fall under the following six broad Groups:-A-GENERAL POPULATION TABLES.
B-EcONOMIC TABLES.
C-HOUSEHOLD AND AGE (SAMPLE)
D-SOCIAL AND CULTURAL TABLES
E-SUMMARY TABLE.
F-LoCAL TABLE.

TABLES

There are five Tables under General Population Tables.

These are:~

I AREA, HOUSES AND POPULATION.
A- I I VARIATION IN POPULATION DURING FIFTY YEARS.

A-

A - I I I TOWNS AND VILLAGES CLASSIFIED BY POPULATION.
A- IV TOWNS CLASSIFIED BY POPULATION WITH VARIATIONS SINCE 1901.
A- V TOWNS ARRANGED TFlRRITORIALLY WITH POPULATION BY LIVELIHOOD
Cy. . ASSES.

Economic Tables comprise of three separate tables.
B-

I

B- I I
B- I I I

These are:-

I_..IVELIHOOD CLASSES AND SUB-CLASSES.
SECONDARY MEANS OF Ll:VELmOOD.
EMPLOYERS,
EMPLOYEES AND INDEPENDENT WORKERS
AND SERVICES BY DIVISIONS AND SUB-DIVISIONS.

There are five Tables in the Group of Household and Age SaDlple Tables.

c-

I

IN INDUSTRIES

These are:-

HOUSEHOLD (SIZE AND COMPOSITION).

C- I I LIVELIHOOD CLASSES BY AGE GROUPS.
C - I I I AGE AND CIVIL CONDITION.
C- IV AGE AND LITERACY.
C - V SINGLE YEAR AGE RETURNS.

They have been prepared on sa'1nple basis.

Social and Cultural Tables consist of seven Tables.
D-

I

LANGUAGES;

D - I

(I) MOTHER

These are:-·

TONGUE; D - I (II)

D- I I RELIGION.
D- I I I SCHEDULED CASTES AND SCHEDULED TRIBES.
D- IV MIGRANTS.
D - V DISPLACED PERSONS:BY LIVELmOOD CLASSES.

D- VI NON-INDIAN

NATIONALS.
D -VII EDUCATIONAL STANDARDS.

There is only one summ.ary Table:E-SUMMARY FIGURES BY ADMINISTRATIVE UNITS.

There is only one local table:(iii)

INFIRMITIES.

BILINGUALISM.

9

DEFINITIONS AND KEY TO SYMBOLS

Definitions.
Tract: --In past censuses the census figures were tabuln,ted U\' adlnillistrative units
i.e. districts, tehsils, etc.
This time in ahnost all tables the fignrus };ave been rcpresented
by units which have been technically called "TRACTS". Tracf.H a.re of three kirlds, (1) all
villages of a sub-division taken together form one rural tract; (:~) all towns (which are not
cities in a district taken together form an Hurban non-city tract" and '3) every city is an
"urban city tract" or in short Hcity tract".
A list of tracts comprlsed in each district has
heen givcn in the handbook of the district.

Town:-A '~Town" has been defined as every muni('lpality. e,\'ery cantonment or
every village which had a popUlation of 5,000 or over in
1U -+ 1 or any other village
which was treated as a town for special reasons by the Statp Cenf'nls Superintendent

Oity: - A "City" is normally defined as a town with a, popuJation of one lac or over
but this definition has been relaxed in H,ajasthan, and towns with a, population of .')0,0110 or
over have also been treated as eitics, to hring the definition iu unifonnity with the
one adopted in the Municipal Act.
Village:--A
"Village" Ineans a revenue mauza ,vhose
separate name. It includcl" aU hamlets attached to it._

rC\-ellUe 11'\

realised under a

Ho'u,se -- A '"House" has been. defined as every strncture mad._. of any lllaterial which
is actually used as human habitati(Jn or if not so used is capable of being so used, which
has separate Inain entrance from the street, lane, by-lane, etc
It includes structures of
all kind.::; su\~h a,s residential houses, temples, mosque!"'" offices, etc. The minimum which was
necessary for qualifying a struetUl'(>' to be dassed as a housn ,vas at least two walls and a
roof made of any Inaterial.

Occupied House.-'"Occupied

houses"

were

t.hose

which

were used

actually

for the

residence of human beings.

Houehold.-A "Household" haR been defined to nlean and include all-persons living
in one and the sanle house and dining at a common mess irrespective of their blood relationship e. g. servants residing with their masters and taking meals in their kitchen were treated
as members of the master's household.
On the contrary even nearest relatives as husband
or wife were treated as separ3"te families if for any reason they happened to live 1n separate
buildings and dine at separute kitchens.
Household Population. - "Household Populatiol1" means persons living In nunlbered
houses as members of a commensal family induding guests and servants. It does not
include (a) houselel:ls persons or (b) inmates of institutions likp jails, hospitals, hostels,
dak bungalows, boarding houses, orphanages, sarais, dhannashaJas, police lines, mHitary
lines, asylums, etc.

Displaced person.-A "Displaced person" was defined as "a pel ~on "'Tho llljgrated from
Western Pakistan after 1st March 1947 or from Eastern Pakistan after 15th October 1946
due to comlnunal disturbances or fear of disturbances or due to partition of India and
Pakistan.
Ohildren born to such persons after their migration to India were not to be
treated as displaced persons."
In

Ward. - A "Ward" Was defined as municipal ward in case of municipal towns.
non-municipal towns wards have been made arbitrarily by the Census Departnlent .

.Af eans of Livelihood:-In former censuses it was customary to represent the basic
population data by community or religion.
This time an innovation has been made and
in most of the tables the figures are published by means of livelihood groups. All
occupations have been classified under eight broad classes and given eode numbers which are
as follows:I-Oultivators of land wholly or mainly owned and their

dependants.

II-Cultivators of land wholly or mainly unowned and their dependa'1t$.

10
ITf-Cultivating

]ahuurnrs

and t.heir dependants.

IV-N on-culti vatin:~ oWners of laud, agricultural rf"llt receivers and their dependants.
Persons inellldiug dependants who derive their principal IlleallS of livelihood from:V-Prorluction

other

than cultivation.

VI-C,nurnerce.

VI J - Transport.
VIIT-Other

servi,~eR

arHI llliscellaneous sourees.

N. B.-In mOf;t of the Tables. the mil

class

nUTGLer is

only

given instead of describing the dal;s.

Oode No.-In the enumeration stage a set of location code numbers was prescribed
to identify each inhabited spot. whereby the districts were numbered serially within the
State, tehsils within a district and cities. towns and villages wit·hin a tehsil.
Similarly
houses
were num bered within a village and households
within each house. Hamlets
were given sub-numbers nnder the number of the parent village.

Key to Symbols
MIL
T
R
U

P
M

F
S.D.R
U. N. C.

Means of livelihood.
'l'otal.
Rural.
·Urban.
Persons.
Males.
Females.
Sub-Division Rural
Urban Non-City.

Letter "M" when used with the nanle of a
HT. B", Town Board; '''N. A", Notified Area.

oity indicates

uMunicipaJityH. lettf'T8

11

DISTRICT CENSUS DATA AT A GLANCE

1951
2'4
Desert Sub-Region.
Code No. and Nanw of SUb-ltegion
2'41 Rajasthan Dry Area Division.
Code No. and Name of Natural Division
Code No. and NanlO of District:
2 -411 Bikaner
(1) According to Natural Region
Bikaner
(2) According to Enumeration Loeation Oode 9

1. Area in sq. miles

2.

Proportion to total area. of the State.

8,446·6

()'5

P. C.

Population:-

1951

1941

P. C. of total
Population of the
State.

·Perso:n~

Male!:>

Feluales

Femalos per
1,000 males

330~329
181~341

L71 ,279

l{

U

148,988

H5,175
76,104

159,050
86,166
72,8S4

929
905
958

1-4
5-6

{~

303,836
167,035
136,.801

H2.8561
88.017
74,839

140.980
'19,O}8
61,962

866
898
828

2-3
1-4
7-2

{T

{

3. Densitl' Per square mile in

2'2

39
36

1951
1941

4. Variation in population:Actua.l

Peroenta.ge

+ 14,457

1901-1911
1911-1921
1921-1931
1931-1941
1941-1951
1901-1951 (in the last 50 years)

+

8'0
2-8
+18-5
+34-8
S'7

5,552
-t- 35,161
-t- 78,426
26,493
+148,985

+

+

+82-2

+ 8'4

5_ Mean decennial growth rate during 1941---51

G, ToWDlJ and villages classified by population
P_ C. of total

FeUla.les per
1,000 males

No.

Population

popula.tion of
District

Cities

1

117,113

35'5

935

Towns other than Cities

6

31,875

9'6

1,047

4

3'3

82
372

11,053
43,151
56,673
70,464

13 1
17-2
21'3

---

----

993
941
897
877

490

]81,341

Vi.llages with a Popula.tion of:Over
5,000
2,000 to 5,000
1,000 to 2,000
500 to 1,000

Less than
TOTAL

500

32

54"9

--905

12
7. OccuPied Houses and Households:No. of occupied
houses

No. of households

55,305

65,857

31:0 791

34,301
31,556

T
R
U

23,514

Persous per
household

Persons per
occupied house

5
5
5

(j
l'
,I

6

8. Number of households per 100 occupied houses

119

---------------------------------- - - - - - -----9. Number of displaced persons:-Persons

Male:.:

Females

T

5,012

200
4,R12

2,634
103
2,531

2,378

R
U

97

2,281

---~------

------- -----

10. Distribution of population by MjL classes Actual and per 1,000:-

----,------- -- ---- ---- --- - - Total Agricultural

________________
A ctua. I

i

1__ -

I

_

I per !
i 1,000 I

Actual

_

II

_

I per
I 1,000

-- --r ------ - -- - ---- ,------

Actual

I _ IV ___ _

III

per
11,000

Actual

I

I

per
t
I
per
J ,OO(_)_ __ A~ ua __ 1,000_

T

175,764

5'32

114,058

345

59,222

179

875

3

R

165,0{:}4

910

108,990

601

54:,220

299

647

3

U

10,670

72

5,068

34

5,002

34

228

1.5

i

5

1,609

7
372

------------- - Total Non-Agricultural

v

per
il,OOO

Actual

Actual

I

per

1,000

--~--

VIII

VII

VI

per
- A(~t~ai· -ll~~O_ [A~tU~I- .. I_l~~~O - Actual
1,000
------I

T

154,565

468

22,633

69

40,744

R

16,247

90

3,306

18

4,187

I 123
I

I

9,648

29

81,540

247

23

557

3

8,197

46

245

9,091

6]

73,343

492·

I

u

138,318

928

19:0327

130

36,557

-------------=-------- .:,__------------.:..-.-- _--!._----------PerSOllS

Percentage of total
population of
the District

268,390
683

81'3
0'2

23,656

7'2

11. Distribution of population by Religion:Religion
Hindus
Sikhs
Jains
Buddhists
Zoroastrians
Muslims
Christians
Jews
Others

2

:n,470
128

Insignificant
11·3
Insignificant.

13

12. Literates:~
Actual

r-T
R
U

Percentage

, - _ _ _ _ _ -_....A.. _ _ _ _ _ _-..,.

....A..

~

Persons

Males

Femal~~s

Persons

Malt>s;

Fenutles

36,382
5,693
30,689

2~,201

7~181

553
6.628

11-0
3-1
25-1

17-0

5,140
24.061

4'5
0'6
9'1

5-4-

31'6

13. Distribution by Economic Status:Self-supporting Persons
Earning dependants
Non -earning de pend an ts

114,173
23,047
193,109

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------14. Average" population per Tehsil

82,582

15. Average Area per Tehsil ..

2,111-7

16. Towns with their Code No:9/1/112
9/1/134
9/1/128
9/1/63
9/1/25
9/2/147
9(3/59

Bikaner City M.
Ganga Shahr M.
Bhinasar
M.
N a pasar
J\tI.
Deshnoke
Lunkaransar M_
NokhaMandi M.

Sq. Miles

17. Tracts Comprised in this District
40. 13ikaner North (Hq. Bikaner) Sub-Division Rural

4,]. Bikaner South (Hq. Bikaner) Sub-Division Rura.l
42_ Bikaner District Urban Non-City

4-3. Bikaner City

N. B.-The first number represents the District, Second 'rehBil and the Third tOWD.

18. Tehsils with their Code No:No. of
Households

Household
Population
,-------~----~

9/1
9/2
9/3

9/4

'Bikaner
Lunkaransar
NokhaMandi
Kolayat (Magra)
N. B.-Figures in item ,N'o. 14, 15 &

40,339
7,826
13,230
4,462

Literates
r-------~------~

Mal<"s

Females

Males

Females

100,188
21,227
37,468
11,158

94 ,(_17 ()
18.561
34,()43
12,340

24,031
1,615
2,558
997

tl,535
242

]8 include the figures of urban areas of the t-8hsils concerned.

277
127

15

A-GENERAL POPULATION TABLES
A-I.-Area, Houses and Population
Explanatoey Note:This table sho"Ws for the District of Bikaner and for each of its Tehsils. number of villages, uccupied houses, and tot.al rural population
for Inales and felnales. i"ienal No. 10 includes all towns in tho Eikaner Du.trict. which do not corne under the definition of city.
The figures of arCa. agalllsL e,wh unit have been entered as supplied by. the District Officer. They represent the t-otal area. of the
unit, rural as \V"ll as urban, as separs;te flgures for urban units were not availabl('. The total area of the district as supplied hy t.he
Surveyor Genera,l of In, Ii.. has bAen given against the name of the District within bracketR. The Tebsilwise area figure" could
not be ma.de availahlt' from the Surveyor General's Office.
There are 4 tehsil", in thi"< dlstrict nanl.ely Bikaner. Lunkaransar. Nokha and Kolayat (Magra).

Po P U L A T I O ! f

~

r-- - . - - - - - - - ' - - - - - - - - - "

Administrative Unit

a:i

Area in Sq.
miles

Villa.ges

Towns

Occupied
house ...

}'ersoDII

Males

Females

(2)

(3)

(4o)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

56.305

330~29

171.279

159,050

( L)

10.150
(8.447)
10,160

490

81,791

181.341

95.170

86.166

7,047

285

16,388

9OJ!~6

47,573

42,673

:I.91:.!

140

9,409

52,ull

27.443

25.068

3,13.5

145

6,979

37,735

20,130

17.605

3,103

205

15,403

91.095

47.802

48,493

Nokha Tahsil RuraL _

1,)0122

117

11.307

67.554

35.219

:l2.335

8

Kolayat (Magra) TehsIl Rural

1,281

81'1

4.096

23,541

12,31'13

1l.168

9

Bikaner Distriot Urban

7

23,514

148.988

7'6,10.

72.884

10

Eikaner District Urban Non-City

6

4,793

31.875

16.568

16.307

11

Bikaner

1

18.721

117.113

tiO,536

56.577

1

BilI::aner District Total

2

Bikaner District Rural

3

Bikaner (North) Sub·Division Rural

4

Bikaner Tahsil Rural

5

Lunka.ransar 'rehail Ultral

e

Bikaner (South) SUb-Division Rural

7

490

7

City

A. U-Variation in Population during fifty Years
lbplanatorsr No.e:
This table compares the population of the district as composed on 1st March 1951, with those o£ previolls five censWle8.
the past censuses have heen taken from Table I I of the- 1941 Census Report of Ra.iputana a.nd A;ir;ner Merwara.

Census Year

Persons

( 1)

(2)

1901

181,244

1911

19.5.801

+ 14.457

102.559

+ 8,044

93.242

+ 6.413

1921

J90,249

5,552

100,660

1,899

89,589

-

HI31

225,410

+ 25,161

118,996

+18,336

106.414

+16.8~5

1941

303,836

+

78,426

162,856

+43,860

140,980

+3-i,566

1951

330,329

+ 26.493

] 71,279

+ 8,'t23

159,050

+18,070

Bei Variation (1901-1951)

Va.riation

The fjgures oC

( 3)

Males
(4)

Variation

Females

Variation

(S)

(6)

(7)

94,515

+148,985

86,829

+76,7'64

3.653

+72,221

16

A. ilL-Towns and Villages
Explanatory Note:'l'h,,) ha.ve been d""s"ified according t ~ populat.ion into <"lasses

'{'his -ta.ble dea.ls with the t,owns as well a,. village" ta.ken together.
hAve Lee" shown separately for the district as a whole and for each t-eh'lil.

In add,t;ion to to~s t,here iF! no village with a

popula.tion

'1'owns and villages

c:i

Z

;'ota.l
number

Adminiat,rahve Unit

OJ
'c

T'olO,~1

of inhabited
townS and

""
:z

r---------"'-----------.,

villages
(1)

,Population

~------------

Total

r---------,. ....J'>....... _ _ _ _ - - _ _
Males

FomaleH

t61

(7 )

t8)

159.050

486

89,628

80,660

Persons

:;o.I"le"

ll'emalee

(3)

(4;

(.'»

171.279

(2)

----Number

~

1

Bika.nllT Dis$riot

497

330,829

2

Bikaner (North) SUb-DiVIsion

291

234,677

121,428

113,249

283

45,100

40,095

.co

H, kaner Tehsil

145

104,864

100,188

94-,676

1 :39

26,292

23,904

4

Lunkaransa:r Teh"'il ..

14,6

39,813

n,2·W

] 8,573

14~

IS.80S

16.191

5

Bikaner (South) Sub-Division

1>06

95,652

49,851

4iJ.801

203

44.528

40,565

6

~okha

118

72,111

37,468

:~-!,6-i3

I ];;

32,145

20.407

7

Kolayat (Magra) TehRil

88

23,341

12,383

11.158

8S

12,383

11 ,1S8

Mandi Tehsil

A. IU-Towns and Villages
Towns and "'illages with a population of2.000-10.000-(Go,.c/d)_

- - - - - - . " r---2.000-5,000

Adminishative Unit_

, -_ _ _ _ _ _.A. _ _ _ _ _ _ - ,

(1)

Total

5,000-10.000

r--------"------------.

--.

.A.

Number

Males

Females

Number

Males

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

Number

Males

Females

(21)

(2:!)

Females

1

Bikaner Diurict

7

ll.OO3

11,046

3

10,112

10767

1

80,536

56,577

2

Bikaner (North) Sub·Division

4

5,680

5,810

3

10,112

10,787

1

60,536

58.577

3

Bik",ner Tehsil

2

3,248

3,428

:1

10,112

10.767

60.536

56,577

'"

Ll.lnkaransar Tehsil

2

2.432

2,382

5

Bikaner (South) Sub-Divilrion

3

5,323

5.236

6

Nokha Mandi TehsiI

3

5,323

1).236

7

Kola.yat (Magra) Tehall

1

17
Classified by POPUlatidD
lIB shown in the h.,ading of tho t,able.

The number of the towns and v-illafe. heloIlglrg to escl. ('lass and

their

popiflticn

Fex'Q,~ise

of S,lOO and over in this distriot.
With less th!i.D 2.00J Population

_-_--

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ..A-

Less thaI)
,.- ______
J- 500
--~

500-1,<:00
...A. _ _ _ _ _ _

,,---

To'WTIS and villages with a popu'.
tion of2,ODO-10.O< O-{Confd.)

~

----~-------.

I,OOO-2,OCO
...A. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ --.

r-

(18)

(19)

(20)

20,928

10

21,115

21,813

1

Maler<

Females

(13)

(14)

(IS)

(16)

t I 7)

82

29,869

26.804

3:2

22,2:!!J

9.426

15

10,470

Females

Number

(9)

(10)

( 11)

(12)

372

37,533

32,928

Mates

-;

'J!

"a males

Number

Males

Total

r--~------..A..--~--~~--~
Ma~es

FeIDalee

Number

,-------------- ~
Nu:n:ber

239

24,220

20.073

29

10,410

9,SS6

7

15,792

16.5"

:2

108

11,369

9,710

19

6,771

6,312

12

8,J62

7,i'-8:!

i)

13,360

14,195

3

131

12,851

10.9')3

10

3,639

3, 11 ~t

3

2.:-lIR

2,114

;,l

:!,432

2,382

4

133

13,316

12,255

53

19,459

17,378

17

11,758

10,932

3

5,323

5,236

Ii

d2

7,547

7,034

38

14,253

12,793

15

10,340

9,580

3

",323

5,236

6

'11

5,769

1),221

15

5,201

4,585

2

1,413

1,352

7

Classified by Population-( Concld. )
Towns sud villagos with .. population uf 10,000 and above

-'--------

---10.000 -20,(1()0

-~----------------

----......,

20.000-50,000

r---~--J-_--------..

r-------.A..---------. r-

Number

Males

FeDlales

Number

MalOli

Feml1.les

Number

Male",

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

(36)

(37)

Fema'es
(38)

Fema.les

Number

Males

(39)

(40)

(41)

1

60,536

58,577

1

1

60.536

56.577

2

1

60,036

56,677

3

":;
6

7

18

A-IV .-Towns Classified by Population with Variation since 1901
This t~b!e oompares the population of towns as ascertained at the Census of 1951 with their populatjon in the last 6
by sex.
The nUTflbe1." of class in which these -towns fall is shown under the name of each town.
agslnst such towns only which were towns in the decades concerned.

CeDSU8'Oe ..

The figures of the previous cenRuql

have bdt'ln glVt'ln

In this tJ.ble the cities and towns have been classified a.nd arranged according to popUlation under six classes namely:I

100.000 and o"er
50.0110 to 100,OJO
50,000
20,000 to
20,000
10,000 to
10,000
5,000 to
L .. =s than 5.00l}

II
III

IV
V

VI

Four new towns:-Ganga Shabr. Nokha. Mandi, Bhinaaar and LunkAransar.

TownaLd

Tehsil

Persona

(2)

(3)

Variation

Males

Varia.tioD

{5)

(6)

Females

Variation

Year
(I)

{.}

(7)

48)

Urba.n population
(District Total)

1901

53,t:15

1911

55.828

+

2,751

28.275

+

1.568

27,051

1921

69,410

+13,584

36.712

+ 8.437

82,698

1.931

85.927

+16.517

45.832

+ 9,120

40,095

+ 1.185
+ 5,14'1
+ 7.397

19..1

136,801

+50,8'14

74,839

+29,00'1

61.968

+21,867

1861

148,988

+12.187

76,104

+ 1,265

72,884

+10.922

Ret; variation (1901-1951)
Bika~T Oity (M)

26,709

26.366

+49,896

+95.913

+46,518

Bikaner

(CLA. I)
26,709

26,366

1901

53.075

UHl

56,826

+ 2,751

28,275

+1 •.566

1921

69.410

+13,584

36,712

+8,437

32.698

1931

85,927

+16,517

45,832

+9.120

40,095

+ 7.397

194,1

127.226

+41,299

69,875

+24.043

57.351

+17,266

191U

117,113

-10,113

60,536

-

56.577

774

(Ja,ngcuhahr (M)

+83,82'1

+64.038

Net variation (1901-1951)

9,339

27,551

+30,211

Bikaner

(CLASS V)
1901
1911

1921
1931

1941
8.819

~.l43

4,676

1941

5,187

2,660

2,527

1951

6,203

!ol,995

3,208

1961

Net y.uiation (1901-1951)

BJka.neJ'
(CLASS V)
1901

lIUl
1921

1931

Net Variation (1901-18151)

+],016

+ 1,186
+ 5.147

19

A. IV-Towns Classifiei by Population with Variation since 1901-(Ooncld.)
Town and
Year

Tehsil
(2)

(I)

Persons

Variation

(3)

14)

Males
(5)

Variation
(6)

Females

Variation

(7)

(8)

Bikaner

NapalfGr (M)

(CLASS V)
1001
1911
1921
1931

1941

4,388

1951

5.857

2,084

2,304
+1,469

2,974

+670

+2,883

Ret variation (1901-1951)
No1Ma Mandl (M)

Rokha. Mandi

(CLASS VI)
1901

1911
lQ21
1931

1941

1951

",557

2,2"9

2,308

Net variation (1901-1951)
Bikaner

Hhinaaar (M)

(CLASS VI)
1901

.".

1911

1921
1931
1941

1951

.,361

2,097

2,264

2.01S

1,110

868

Net variation (1901-1951)
LunkaranMIr (M)

Lunkaransar

iCLASS VI)
1901
1911

1921

1931
1941

I051
~e.

variation (1901-1961)

+71lt

20

1

.9

-

o

~

......

.....

roo

I

~

I

-

I

.....

~
fI.l

QO

~

.8

i

~

~
~

..cl
..p

I

L
(

I
~

I

J
""

.....

I

.....gp

00

I
I

-._

§
.......

8

c.E
00

1

- -.'"..

CI>

.....

II
l

,

1
1
I

l
1f
l

o.....

'"co

I!
l

....o

""t

-M

...:

.....

....
.....00

21

B. ECONOMIC TABLES.
1. In the 1951 Census, the
fica tion Lased on religion.

economic classification

waf;

substituted

for

the

classi-

2. The people have been divided into two broad livelihood categories, mz., the A~ri­
cultural Classes and the Non-Agricultural Classes.

3. There are four Agricultural Classes, defined a.s below:I-Cultivators of land, wholly or mainly owned, and thei!" depcndant;,;.
II-Cultivators of land, wholly Ol' mainly unowned; and their depenrlantR.
III-Culti.vating labourers; and their dependants, and
IV-Non-cultivating owners of land; agricultural rent reeoivers; and their
dants.
4. There are four Non-.\gricultueal Classes,
defined as COlllpru'lng
(including dependants) who derive their principal mean A of livelihood from: ---

all

depenpersons

V-Production other than cultivatioll.

VI-( 'omn18rce.
ViI-Transport.
VIII-Other services, and mi:scellaneous sources.
5. All these
J\1:jL Classes.

clasf~es

have bef"n referred to as

l\l",ans of Livelihood Classcf'; or in brief

::-rOT F: -(8.) Land is deOllled to be nwne(l "if it, j" balo nn "ny tf'lllll'" (b) what.,,"e,. Harne It i" kIlown locally)
which
(·rtrries with it til., "ight of pprmaJl('nt o<'ellpane), for purr,we" of L'1l~t":nt.10tl'·.
Sueh light should be
heritable.
rt rn"~' h" P>I,t n""d not, necessarily IJC) also transferable.
(h)

-\ "Cultivator"
(Li\TeIihood
CIa"s I or II ) is distinguished f['orn <1. "Cllitivatinf! Labourer". (Liyelihood CIa"" Ill) as t,he person "ho takes the respolI,<ible
deciosionb<
which con:5t,itute the d,rect1on
of the process of (. ultivation.
All (]uitl vating
lahourers are emplnYflCs of cultiva.tors.
il1 any llon-a;:;I';Cllltllral entel'pri:;<> or estu.bh"hn~ellt is ba"n,} {'In the
on the natllre of the entf'rpr'"", or • st.-.hlishllHH,t. concprned. Thus, for
instance Hot
a]]
["atlwnv Pl(1~rl,')ype-.:
aro ('ias~iflahlo
llllderI . . ivelil.tood C!o.:8S \'11
I Transport).
"']_'hOS6
Amployed ill Hailway
w('rkshups arC' crn.si'lfJf\hle under LiYE'lihooci Class V
an.l those
employed on
p.ongtrllctional s ... rviceR under Livelihoo. r Dla,,,s VIII.

(e) The classification of H person elilployed

nature

(,f

hiR

own

work.

not

6. Livelihood Sub-Classes:-Each of the eight MIL Classes has been divided into
suL-classes, with reference to their e~onomi(' status 3A below:-

three

(i) Self-I"upporting persons;
(ii) :\"on-earning dependant!"!; and
(iii) Earning dependa.nts.

Economically active. semi-active and passive p€rs-ons.
7. All non-earning dHpendants are e~onomically paSSIve.
Tbev include persons performing houso-work or other domc>stic or personal services for othel: men~hers of the saIne
familv hou8ehold. But they do not illeJude Hunpaid familY workers or persons who take
part ~along 'with the lnemh~rs of the fami!:\' household in carrying on ~ultivation or a home
industry as a family enterprise".

8. All earning dependa.nts are eoono'uical1y s .... mi-active only. 'I hough. they contrihute to the carr} i.ng on of economic activities, the Inagnitude of their indi vidual contribution is deemed to be too small to justif~T their de8criptk~n as economically active.
9. All self-supporting persons are, ordinarily, economically iH·ti ve. But there are
certain Classes and groups which constitute an exception to this 'ule. These are mentioned below:(i)

The self-supporting persons of Agricultural Class IV.

(ii) The following groups of self-supporting persons who are included in nonAgricultural Class VIII and derive their principal means of livelihood
from misceI1aneou8 sources (otherwi"e than through economic activity):(a) Non-working owners of non-agricultural property,

22
(h) Pensioners and remittance holders,
(e) Persons living on
occupa tions, and

charity and other persons

with unproductive

(d) inmates of penal institutions and asylums.

Classification of Economic activities and Economically active persons.
10. Euonoruiu activities may be defiut:d as including
all activities of
which
the result is the production of u~eful commodities or the performance of useful services
but not including the performance of domestic or personal serviues by members of a.
family household to one another.

11. The lllOst Illlnortant among all economic activities is tIH::' cultiv"ttion of land
(or thc production of th~ fjeld crops). It stallds in a category lIy itself.
All other
BconOln ic acti vi ties' Ina y be regarded as fa lling Hl another ca te gory "\y hich may be
referred to as "Industries and Services". All thesc activities may he
classified with
reference to the nature of the commodity produced or service porformed. Under the
presout scheme, aJ! industrieB and services are classified in 10 divisions; and these divisions
are sub-divided into 88 sub-divisions. The scope of activities included In each subdivision is indicated by its title.
12. Econoluically active persons
or CUltivating lahoureri'l 1,. e., they are
to III.
13. Economically acti ve persons
able in the divisions and sub-divjsioDs.
further divisible into three sections viz.,

cultivation, are either cultivators
(i) of agricultural classes I

engaged III
persons of

~ub-class

engaged jn
persons

industries and services are classifiincluded in each sub-division an~

An

(i) Employers.

(ii) Employees, and
(iii) Independent workers.
14. III effecting this classification~ no account has been taken of whether the
classified person was actually employed or unemployed on the date of enumeration.'
He has been allocated to that particular description of economic activity
from
which
he
has been in fact deriving a regular (that is non-casual) income, as his principal
means of livelihood.

The Tables.
15. The Econom.ic tables for the State as a whole with break-up for Natural
Divi8ions and districts will he found in Beport Pd,rt II-B of the Census of India 1951,
Volume
X,
Rajasthan and Ajmer. It also cont-:Lins a full discussion of the Indian
Census Econonlic Classification Scheme and its comparison with
International Standard
Industrial
Cla.ssification Scheme evolved bv the 'United
Nations
Organisation.
This
Handbook contains the aLove tables for this district in which
they are
published down
to tract level.
V

16. The replies recorded jn the census Slips against census question 9, 10 and 11 have been
used for cla-sifying every '>llllmerated person within the fran18 work of Economic Classification of people described above. The results have been exhibited in the three t.ables.

(a) Economic Table I

Livelihood classes and sub-classes

(b) Economic Table

II

Secondary lneans of livelihood.

(c) Economic Table

III

Employers, employees" and independent workers
in indnstries and ser-yices by divisions and subdivisions.

Economic Table I

17. This table is the result of the record of replies to the census question NO.9 (1).
It shows the distribution of population in the eight }i velihood classes and 3 sub-classes
of each livelihood Class.
A complete picture has been presented of economically acti,~e,
semi-&,~ tive and passive persons.

23

Economic Table II.
IS. It specifleH the number of self-supporting persons in each of the 8 classes mentioned above, who have more than one means of livelihood and cross classifies
them
according to the nature of such secondary means of livelihood under the same eight
_classes. It also diRplr"ys the number of earning dependants who suppleInent (with their
.own activities) thc resources provided for their ma.intenance by the pE'rSOllS on whom
they are depend,~nt.
The economic activity of the economically semi-active persons
whereby they supvlement .the a.hove resourc~.s has heen ~hown in this ~ablt. The replies
recorded in the slIps aga.Illst census question 11 showIng the occupatIon of semi-active
persons as also the. secondary means 0 f Ii v<:lil:ood of self-sup~ort~ng persons (with
111.orO
than one occupatIon) other thn.n the prlnCIpal Incans of hvehhood, are the hasis of
this ta bsle.

Economic Table III.
19. This table is lilnited to economically active persollH Oll]Y· Self-supporting pen>ons
engaged in industries and I-;ervices hav.e .been classified unc!-e~ ~O diviRions .~,~d. su~-divisions
thereof. They have been furthpr dlvHled under each dlvlsIon and SUb-divislon Into three
categories "Employers", '''Employees'' and "Independent 'Vorkers"
(a) MIL Class V (Production other than cultivation) corresponds to didsions
o to 4 to. Primary industries not elsewllere specified, I-Mining and
yua.rrying; 2-Processing and
manufacture foodstuff.~.
textiles,
leather
and prochH~ts thereof: 8-Processing and lllanufacture nletaIs, ohemicals
and, products thereof~ ~-Processing
and manufacture
notJ
else,"vhere
specified).
(b) MIL Class VI (Coll),meree) corresponds to dtvision 6 (Comm,erce)_
(C)

MIL Class VII (Transport) corresponds to sub-divisions 7-1 to 7'4 of division
7 (Transport, storage and communications).

(d) ~'1/ L Class VIII (Other services and miscellaneous sources) inoludes Division
5 (Construction and utilities), Division 7 (Transport, storage and COlHmunication) with the exception of sub-divisions 7-1 to 7-4; Division 8 (Health,
e;lucation and public adnlinistraho11.) and Division 9 (Services not elsewhere specified).
It also includes other luiscellaneous sources of livelihood e. g. income from investn1.ent, pensions and faulily renlittances,
proceeds of begging and other unproductive activities. These are not,
however, included in Economic Table III which is limited to industries
and services.
Hellc{~
there is a difference to this extent between the
total self-sn pvrting 13orsons
of
the
non-agricultural classes in EcoHOIUic rralJlC" I
and
i-lw total of thi:-; ta.ble. 'rhe reCUl} ci1iation has
been affucted by entries of econcnnically inactive persons
\vith the
following fuether classification at the end of the table (coIunllls ~o. 7D8
to ):;07)
(i) Persolls living principally OIl incollle f[,om non-agriculturn 1 property.
i,ii) Per . mns living principally on pensions, relnittances, scholarshi~s and funds.
(iii, Innlates of ja.ils. asylnms, and alms-houses.
,iv) Recipients of doles.
, v) Beggart; and vagrants(vi) All other persons living prineipally oll-inCOlne derived feom non-productive a.ctivities.

20. The Unit of ( lassificn.tion is the organi8cd -, I':stablishment"_ The eommodity produced or the servicd perfol"nl.ect as a result of the work of the organised establishment is
the criterion for d:tssifying the establishment.
The classification of the est,ablislllnent is
the classification of every nlelnber of the estahlishment.
21. As regards HElllployee8", an persons engaged. in produetion. conlluerce 01' transport (and not beiug dOI11.f'stic ~er\'ants) h~v~ been class.ified under the appropriate subdivisions with reference to theIr own actlvIty, and "Dthout reference to that of their
employer. Domestic servants have all been daHsed iu one ~ub-division without reference to
the nature of their work.
All other eYllp]oyces (including fill nlanagerial and super·...~lsory
eUlployees, c1erks~ llLCssengel's, watchmen and unskilled labourer
of every
description)
have been
classified with referellce tD the commodity produced or servic8:1 rendAn:xl by
their employer~.

24

I-LivelihOod Classes

B.
r------ -

-_ -

--_-

---

AGRICULTURAL
~-------------

d.LL

------

,--- -------Administrative Unit

,.------"'-'----~

r-------.JA.._-- _ _ _ _ _ ~ , - - - - - _ - - " - - - - - - ,

Persons

Males

Females

Persons

Malps

(~)

(3)

( 4)

(5)

«(i)

(7)

l71,279
95175
47,573
47,60!!
76.104
]5.568
1.0,536

159,050
86.166

175,764
165,094
79,701
8fi.393
10.-670
7,ROO
2,870

92.088
86,770

83,676

78324

48,817
45,692

42.101
44,65!J

3. ,(\OO

25,OSO

4().72-.15.352
3,936

20,612

(l)

1
2

Bikaner District Total
Bikaner District Rural

4,

Bikaner (North) Nub-Divi8iun RUl'a1
Bil!;;aner (Sout,h) Xnb-Division Runll

5

Btkaner Distl'ict Urban

6
7

Bikaner District Urban Son-City
Bilroner City

:~

---·---s.C-:(i)Self-supporting
persons
TOTAL

TOTAL POPULATION

330.329
181,341
90.~46

9I,OSJ.'5

148,988
31,i'75

117,1l3

42.fl73

43,493
72.884
16,307
56,"77

F"male,.;

5,318
3,864
1,454

Fetnalee

Ma.les

(0)

(8)

20,951

20,138

10,'773

9,363
815
771

3,125
2,331
794

1.416

44

A(iRICULTURAL

..A.. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

JI--Culti'L,(,tcr.f of land wholly or .".ninly Ufl07lll"d lind their dqClldollt"
~~------~------_ _ _ _ _ , A _ _ _

'] OTAL

1~.(hnini",j,ratiye Unit

f-----_.___-~

,---~--'-----~

Female.,;

Males

:Female8

:\1a'ps

(2:{ J

(24)

(25)

(:If\)

(:!7)

(2S)

2

Bibner District Total
Bikaner District Rural

30,685
28,214

28,587
26,006

11,-l3.5

1(),50~

20.858
19,2:34

2.555

i5,50.\
2,531
1,817
714

464

7,034
6,425
3,3M'
3,080
609

12,lS3
10,NJ4

16779
2,471
1.747
724

10,810
10.346
3.6il5
438

385

2(-i.

224

4

5

Bikaner District Urban

6
7

Bikaner District Urban Non-City
Bikan.,r City

'1,825

11,709
1,624
1,157
467

r--~----~------

..

6,66l

(1)

Bikaner District Total
Bikaner DIstrict Rural

3
4

Bikaner (North) Sub-Division Rural
Rikaner (,south) I'lub-Division Rural

5

Bikaner District Urban

7

B.kaner I>istrkt Urban Non-City
Bikaner City

1

u

-

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ ..A__ _ _ _ _ _ _ ---,

..A..

(47)

(48)

(49)

79,191
8,405
."i,472
2,933
70.786
11,704-

75,374
7,842

5\1,OS2

4
6

7

Bikane:r District Total
Bikaner District Rural

Bika.ner (North) Sub-Division Rural
Bikaner (I'louth) Suo-Division Rural

Bikaner District Urban

"

Bikaner District Urban Non-City
Bikaner City

-"-_ -

-~----- , - - - - - -

Males

Males

(I'O)

(51)

(52)

(53)

4,209
440

69,489

2,76!J
67,532
12.371

40.186
3,756
2,759
f97
36,44.0
4-,974

1,260
264
200
64

5n.161

31,4f\f\

0,073

2~]

37,735
4,385
2,513

!;')!)

1,87::!

2,469

3,769
765

~ 3,350

62.787

n,415

1) ,224-

3J'04

~(i., C:~::-l!)

51,563

. _ _ •_ _ _ _ _ _

~

6,702
4,233

998
315
681

_ _ _ _ _ _C'\ON·AGRICOLTURAI,
__________ - - __

I'erJUTI, (including dependaTlt#J) u:lto derive
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ -- _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ..A
----~--

~,

,------~------,

1

_ ___________ _

VI-Commerce.

--------

'i$
.;:;

J 1)

89

Fettlsles

______________

Male",

137

r----

......- - - . . _

(46)

T J :·AI.

ro

33

143

, - - - - - _ _,A_ __ -

Fp,n".)es

~

.

~O5

237
121
32

n65
1,090
238

S.O. (ii) Non-earning S. O. (iii
dependants
dependant&-

MaleR

--~--

501
380

S C. (i) 801fsupporting persons

Females

_-----.

Admini!'!trative Unib

CLASSES

]\!nl€8

24,{ 75
ll4,243-

rIO)

5,594
5,l56
1,673
3.483
438
301

2,793

5,3:-.n
1,629
1,07R
551

Persons

154,565
16,247
10,154-5
6,702
138.318

••

~29)

Males

NON-AGRICULTURAL

'l'OTAL

,-- -

Males Female"

5,14.)

,.------ --- ---------_ - ______ .A.._____

AdminisLrative Unit

2

~"elna !..-.~

~

ALL

5

...__------.. r - - - - __ ..A.----, ..------

(22)

B,kan .. r (North) Sub-Division Rural
Hd';:fl' er (-outI.) Sub-Di~ri8on Rural

r--

,..------ _,

(1)

~

8

---- __________ ~

-

'!\fales

1

2

-

S. C. (ii) :-loll-Earl i ng S, lJ. (ii,) Earning
dfpendants
dppendants

S. C (.) f<elfsupporting persoDs

Fetuales

C. (i) I"elfsnpporting
person"

---- --------- - ---------_---S. O. (i.) NOIl-

8.0. (iii) Earving
depen.dants

po.rnine:

dt'pendanr"

r-----A...--_~~

,,-- _ _

--A--~~_~

,,--_ _ _ _ ~.. _ _ --....

Males

J'emaJes

Males

Felna-Jes

l\IIales

Females

(f13)

(64)

(I)b)

(66)

(67)

(68)

«(9)

(70)

20,154
2.067

20,590
2,120
1,181
939
18,470
5.945

11,624

8.174
1,087
632
455
7,087
3,277
3.810

19,750
1,994

356
51

311
38

] ,105

28

IS

889
17,756
5.780
11,976

23
305

20

1,206
861

18,087
5,108
12,979

12,525

929

1)46
383
10,695
1,738
8,957

529
88
58
30

441
103
338

93
~12

273
62:

211

~o Begi_8trar Gpnt'r-; .

26

J;ad.ia.

and Sub-classes
CLASSES
_ _ ---L _ _
~

-_~

_ _ _ ~_"""_""::'_~_~ _ _ ~ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

_

I-OuUivatot"/J of lana wholly or mainly own,d and their d ependantlf

GLASSES

,..------------------------"------------------

~--------------------,.

S. C. Iii, Non-earning
dependant.s

S. O. (iii) Earning
dependant.s

S. C_ (i) Selfsupport.ing persons

TOTAL

r-----~---, r-----~

, , - - - --~---~ r-----_.A....----"

- - - , r-------"------.

Males

Femalell

Males

ll'omales

Males

Females

Males

Females

ll.lales

Female.

'10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(H)

(16)

(16)

( 17)

(18)

10,013
9,690

36,619
35.041
15,408
19.633
1.5711

49,266
45,452
21,580
23,872
8,814

6,652
6,037
1.613
4,424
615

13,459
12.736
5,2407
7,489
723

60,038
57,524
30,344

54,020
51.466
26,834

27,180

24,632

2,514

2.554

21,292
25,966
17,352
R,614
1,828

3~8

28,961
28,142
11,961
16,]81
819

964

2,586

5G9

580

2,022

2,030

1,133

526

1,229

46

143

492

524

316

lW3

7

293

6a

7,037

2,653

.

Z

S. C. (iii) Earning
dependants

S.C. (ii) Non-earning
dependant.s

~

r - - - - - . , - - - - - - - . 00

;11 ales

Female:!

(19)

(20)

(21)

36,202
34,252
16,245
18,001
1,950
1,439
511

3,185

7,8ati
7,524

3,416
1,031
2,385

369
368
1

1
2

3,552

3

3.972
281
275
6

4.
6
6

7

GLASSES -(Oono/d.)

-----_._---------------_------ -----_._-------------------.-.-------..

TV-N()n-cultiq_'atinu ~n"r.. of land; <lflricllliurol ren' reeesq_'flr8
and their depellda 7 .ts

III-Gulti,v'l'ing labourer8 an:t their dependants
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _-

S. O. (i) Self8uppotting
persoIl'"

TOTAL

_ _ _ _.A._ _ _ _ _ -

S. C. (ii) Nonearning

_____

r--

~

'3.0. (iii) Earning
dependttnt.s

-"-----------------

S. C. (i) Selfsupporting
persons

TOTAL

d~pend.l.nts

~--~

r---...A.._----.._ r - - - _ _ Jo- _ _ --.. r---_.....A-_ _ _ ~ r----_"._._--~ , - - -_ _ -A-_ _

Fe1nale-s

Males Fetnales

Males

Females

Males

Females

l'dales

i32)

133)

(31)

(35)

(a6 )

(37)

(38)

226

57
49

}46

24

37

8
2

214
138
52
86
76
16

(31 )
374
287

282
79

9~

173
107
35

~5

15

"12:

22

304
206
60
146
98

9
3

1
1

8

32

1

7

Ma.les Fernalpii

Males

F'emal••

(43)

(44)

(46)

627
490

49
49

50

130

5

286
74
27
37

360
137
36
101

47
44
13
31

Fema1ed

I\IaJes

Female,

(3D)

(40)

(41)

745
585
169"
416
160

'il
51
26

410
336

25

54

• 405
267
124
143
138
26

106

112

fi

864
652
179
473
212
63
149

13
12

5

dO

(SO

6

25
17
12

~

(42)

20
15

0"

S. C. (li) NonS. C. (iii)
~
earning
EIlrniJlg
OJ
dependant.l'!
ueppudant.s·;::
,------ _ _...__ ---"'\ r---- -A-_ _ -.... JJ:

.4

1
2
3
4.

a

5

G

3

7

CLAeeE8
Persons

(i""'"t;Ulfg deplMdlitll)

who deri<V1I tllli,. principal means of li·velihood from.

......__-------

,.------~.:o;...;;;~

¥-ProEluctitJlI

_ _ .....,

Earning

-"------,.

r------"-------...

Females

Male.

Females

Males

(li4)

(1S8)

(56)

(M)

12,027
1,'86
1,178
557
10,292
2,157

10,608

6,089
862
622
240
5,227
1,035
4,192

141

976
382

594

1,571
1,048
523
9,035
2,088
6,947

8,ISS

S. C. (ii) Non_arning

S. C. (i) Self-suppOI"ting
persons

TOTAL

1,676
700
559

0'11.,,- than 6uUi'l.'otion

S. C. (iii) Earning
dependants

dependants
, , _ , - _ _ _ _ .J..- _ _ _ _ --.,

~----

Ferdal~"

Males

FemAle.

Male"

(58)

(59)

(60)

(61)

680
118

5,579
728
434
294
4,851

70
42
568
201
367

1,O:n

3,820

-"------------.
(62)

146
122
23
214
91
123

331

a

280
172
108

5

CLASSES - (Gone/d.)

--------

- .. - -

persoTm

,----_.}--~

MaleE!

Fetnales

(71 )
5,244
318
1~5

153
4,926
277
4..84Q

r-:---_.a.__-~

Z

depen da.11t.4!i

JMW~tifi8

epen. an s

(73)

(74)

(75)

(76)

(77)

(78)

4,404
239

2,510
182
106
26
2,378
154
2.224

57
7

2,685
181

4,302

57

134
94
4,074
199
3,875

49
5
2
3

45
4
2

44

41
12
29

3

47

depE'nftante

'0:;

,---_...___---.._ r----"---~ , - - - _ A _ _ _ ~ , - -_ _ _,A... _ _ ~ r---_A__-~ ,----_...A.._ _ _ ~~

(72)

6

---"""

---------------~

Males Females Males Fem~Jes Males Females Males

1
50

8

7

- - -_ _ _ _ _. _ _ _ -, , . . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - " - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - , .
S. O. (~i) Ron- S.C.(iii) Earning
S. C. 0) ~plf- S. C. (ij).Non- 8. C. (iii) Earnibg
earning
ddt
TOTAL
support.lng
earnJD!<
dependants
Cii

Male" Female!!

142
97
4,165
214
3,961

4.

VIII-Other lIervice3 and miscellaneous 80urCUI

VII-Tr"n.8port

Self-supporting

2

68

'heir principal m~anlf of livelihood from
r - - - - - - - - _ _ _ _ _ _ -'_
S_ C. (i)

1

8C7
8S7

359

9,259
1,078
647
425
8,187
1.715
6,472

w

124
2,604
120
!l.3S4

228

3
4.1

2

(80)

(81 )

41,786 39,774
4,285
3,912
2,702
2,923
1,362
1,210
37,481 36,862
4,162
4,124
33,319 31,738

19,973
1,833
1,485
348
18,140
2,047
16,093

(79)

Females Males Females

(82)
2,943
233
147
86
2,710
458
2,252

Males

Female.

(84)

(85)

(86)

21.297 36,178
3,408
2,389
2,347
1,390
1,061
999
18,908 32,770
3,530
1,987
16,921 29.240

496
63
48
15
433
128
305

653
271
208
83

(83)

882
136
246

1
2
3
4
6
6
7

B. D-Secondary Means
NUMBER OF PERSONS DERIVING THEIR

,.----------- ----------------- - - - - - - -

, - - -_ _CUlIivation
_ _ _ _ _of
_owned
.A- _ _land
________

Livelihood Classes

Self-supporting
persons

T07 ....L

~

Es-mng
dependants

Self-supporting
person.

TOTAL

r---..A.-----., , - - - - " - - - -___ ..-----"------, r - - - . . A
Males Fema.les
(3)

(2)

0)

Ma.les

Females

(4)

(5)

)',:fales

Females

(6)

(7)

---~---

Cultivation
of_ --'-, -_ _ _ _ _ _ _
_____

•

Malea Females
(8)

r-----'-----.

Ma.les FOJDa1••
(10)

( 9)

(11 )

BIXABEB
'l'otal All Classes (both Agricultural

&

Non-

3,334

4.404

1,672

71

1,662

4.333

3,390

3.166

2,041

468

1,615

4,101

46

1

1,569

4,100

1,940

2,675

802

349

1,546

4,089

1,254

900

797

344

10

1>

&55

1,743

5

4

3

1

agricultural)-

All Agricultural Classes
I Cultivators of land wholly or
owned.
II Cultivators of land wholly or
unowned.
III Cultiva.ting labourers

mainly
mainly

IV Non-cultivating owners of land; Agricultural rent receivers.

All Non-agricultural Classes. .

(Persons who derive their Principal means of
livelihood fron}).
V Production other than cultivation.
VI Commerce

VII Transport

VIII Other .ervice. a.nd miscellaneous sources

1,546

4.089

26

1>

16

43

7

30

1

13

6

26

28

2

4

1,719

303

1,626

70

93

233

1.450

491

1,239

119

306

129

277

24

29

105

448

172

372

16

388

41

365

17

23

24

166

74

143

13

9

3

8

I

1

2

52

24

47

II

1.016

130

976

28

40

102

784

221

677

80

NUMBER OF PERSONS DERIVING THEIR

(1)

&

Non-

I Cultivators of land wholly or mainly
owned.
II Cultivators of la.nd wholly or mainly
unowned.
III Cultivating labourers
IV Non-cultivating owners of land;
cultural rent reoeivers.

Agri-

Self-supporting
persons

TOTAL

,..----..Jo'-___._.

r----A..........-~

r---_,A

Males Females

Males

Males Females

(27)

(28)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

2,360

2,887

1,447

1,411

2.201

1,810

1.544

299

256

,_-----""

'1'otal All Classes (both Agricultural
agricultural).
All Agricultural Classes

Commerce

Production other th an cUltivation
--------------------------,~-------------------~
Earning
TOTAL
Self-supporting
dependants
persons

Livelihood Cl_sea

""\

Males

Females

(26)

4.334

,.....---....A

'\

(29)

949

Females

"\

Males

Females

(34)

(35)

3,938

1,97'8

2,747

904

1.191

1,074

1.794

1.055

1.416

1,712

146

1,248

83

464

63

561

36

483

10

2,208

1,827

1,487

820

721

1,007

1,226

1,017

927

2~4

3

2

2

2

4

1

3

.

4

14

5

9

1

5

398

382

140

45

256

337

407

256

128

222

265

53

11

169

254

45

25

27

VI Commerce

54

52

18

lQ

a6

33

279

203

62

38

VII Transport

1~

2

10

9

2

11

3

7

1

101

.,3

6g

42

4.8

72

24

·n

All Non-agricultural Classes ..
(Persons Who derive their Principal mea.n. of
livelihood from).
V Production other than cultivation.

VIII Other servicelil and miscelJaneou. .oure_

15

43

27
01 Livelihood
BECONDARY MEANS OF LIVELIElOUD FROM

-_..._----------------------unowned lana

Employment 08
labourer
Ben'
agricultural
__ cUlti'Vating
.A. _ _ _ _ _
_______- - " _ _ _ _ _ _ _
_ _on
__
_ .A._ _ _land
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _.....

_ _ __

----------~

Earning: dependants

.,-_---10-.- _ _--,..
Male.
Females
(13)

(12)

TOTAL

_ - - - . . A . - - __ --.
Males
Females

Belf-supporting
Earning
TOTAL
Self-supporting
Ea.rning
persons
dependaDt.
peraoDs
dependants
,..-_ _ _ ..A. ___ -., ,..__--..A._-___ -..A.-----,. ,---__ .A._ _ - . , ,..- _ _ .....___ _
Males
Females
Males Females
Males Famales Males Femalee Males Fe:mals.

(14)

(15)

( (6)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

(23)

(26)

_DISTRICT TOTAL
1.3'9

2.698

1,556

2.679

418

32

1,138

2,647

71

76

57

2

14

1.138

2.326

1.515

2.594

389

26

1.126

2.568

38

62

29

2

9

457

556

754

1.247

355

12

399

1.235

9

1

7

33

14

711

1,331

24

50

21

2

3

4.8

16

2

1

4

II

5

U

744

1.345

2

3

16

2

24

24

1

1

211

372

41

29

6

12

76

157

21

44

12

3

12

23

61

6

3

6

5

13

9

107

HI

2

655

4

79

33
1

28
14

1

14

8
1

1

23

18

9

2

38

11

74

35

3

_ SECONDARY MEANS OF LIVELIHOOD FROM

Transport
_-------------------..A.,------------~

Earning
dependan:ta

persons

Females

(36)

Earning
dependants

Self-supporting

TOTAL

r-----~-------.

Males

Other

------.~------.-,

Males

r-------.~------~

Females

Males
(40)

, - - - -_

_,A

Females

Females

(41)

(42)

(43)

( 37)

(38)

(39)

657

1.011

206

511

143

319

63

378

799

149

459

122

318

27

78

26

80

29~

773

54

60
459

49

,

Males

5

(46)

(47)

(48)

(4,9)

192

4.457

3,509

2.875

740

1.582

2,789

lU

3.746

3,067

2,532

678

1,214

2,891

1,971

1.987

1.152

152

819

1.835

1.738

1,069

1,349

523

389

546

12

I

5

8

1

2

141

17

13

15

279

212

57

52

21

18

25

15

9

4

:227

165

13

4

4

2

11

7

20

18

U

10
5
2

2
1

I

-

persons
dependants
,-----.-k
, r,.----~
Males Fenmles
Males Females
Males Fema.les
(45)

1

30

r-------------------~--------------------Self-supporting
TOTAL
Earning

(44)

20
318

-.,

8ennces and miscellaneous 80urcea

20

2

19

711

442

343

64

368

378

11

67

51

5

44

62

3

30- .

38

8

44

22

88

51

3

6

18

3Z

20

14

1

24

19

325

240

60

256

276-

28

B. II-Secondary __111
NUMBER OF PERSONS DERIYING THE1R

~--------------------~-------------------~

Livelihood Cla.~es

Self-supporting
persons

TOTAL

Earning
dependants

SE!lr'8upportin~

TOTAL

,-....-------. Ma.les
.---.--=---------.
Males Females
Females
Males Females Males FI3:rnales
,----""'--~

(1)

(2)

(4)

2.031

4.302

434

25

1,608

4.096

43

1

1,542

4.084

23

5

(5)

(6)

r-------~__.

persons
.----~"'""
Males Females

(9)

(10

2.ua

2.598

1,233

280

1.885

2,314

779

244

1.233

680

776

24.1

623

1,604

3

4

1

3

(7)

(8)

1,603

4,277

1,565

4,095

(11)

:am:AttU
Toial All Classes (both Agricultural & Nonagricultural)
All Agricultural Cla.sses

I Cultivators of land wholly or mainly
owned
II Cultivators of land wholly or mainly
unowned
III Cultivating labourers
IV Non-cultivating owners of land;
cultural rent receivers

All Ion-agricultural Classes

Agri-

--

(Pl!>rsona who derive their Principal means of
livelihood from)
V Production other than cultivation

VI Commerc8

1,54,2

13

10

43

7

30

1

13

6

26

26

2

429

206

391

24

38

182

558

279

454

206

107

191

11

15

96

213

HO

160

72

17

64

10

8

7

94

10

79

VII Transport

1

VIII Other services Gnd miscellaneous sources

5

151

81

2

s

2,

1

136

36

79

15

249

121

213

22

NUMBER OF PERSONS DERIVING THEIR

Oommercl':

Production other Ui,an cuUivation
Livelihood Classes
TOTAL

Self-supporting

Ea.rning

pe:diltihS

dependants

Males Females
(1)

Total All Classes (both Ap.iellUural &
~rfcultu.Dl)

NOD-

All Agricultural Classes
I CuIt.ivators of land wholly or mainly
owned
I I Cultivators of land wholly
unowned
III CUltivating labourers

or mainly

IV Non-oultivating owners of land;
cultural rent receivers

c-----------------------------TOTAL
Self-supporting ~t8dbs

Males

Fem.ale~

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

8,862

1.907

2,691

831

1,171

1,076

1,783

1,073

1.403

263

8.763

1,734

2,658

823

1,095

911

1,742

1.050

1.383

256

1,703

143

1,243

81

460

62

514

33

455

10

2,033

1,588

4

1,404

741

629

847

1

3

1,223

1,015

924

244,

3

2

2

2

Agri-

13

3

8

1

5

2

2

_.

109

173

33

8

76

165

41

82

153

8

2

74

151

1

VI Commerce

10

2

10

2

37

20

VII Transport

2

~

2

2

VIII Other servioes and mil!lcellaneous souroes

Hi

16

13

10

3

3

All Ron-agricultural Classes

..

(1"ersons Who derive their Prinoipa.l means of
livelihood from.)
V Production other than oultivation.

.

2

23

20
1
17

6

1

III Li\'elihood
SECONDARY MEANS OF LIVELIHOOD FROM

-'---------_-'-----

-".

Ea.rning

---------".

,-----------------------------,.
TOTAL
Self-suppm:ting
Earning
persons

dependa.nts
r-----'-----".

Male3

Females

(12)

(13)

Females

(14)

(15)

Ma.les

Fema.les

(16)

TOTAL

dependants

,-------"-------" ,-------"-------" .----"------.,
Males

Rent on agricultural land

, -_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ A _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ~

(17)

Males Females

r--_"_--~

Males

Females

(IS)

(19)

(20)

(21)

Self-supporting
persons
,--_ _ ...J-_ _ - ,
Males Females
(23)

(22)

Earning
dependants

, - _ _ ...A-_ _ ~

Males Females
(24)

(25)

DtI'raICT

l\t1~L

1,210

2,318

1,508

2.590

387

29

1.121

2.561

46

81

37

9

59

1,106

2,070

1,502

2.582

383

26

1,119

2,556

37

61

28

9

59

457

439

749

1,241

350

12

399

1,229

9

'7

2

623

1,604

744

1,339

33

14

711

1,325

24

50

2

3

9

2

9

2

24

24

4

II

104

243

6

8

4

3

2

53

134

3

3

I

3

2

15

OS

1

3

I

99

11

9

9

3

5

1

2
36

2

2

2

48

3

2

21

2

I

3

3

SE":'ONDARY MEANS OF LIVELIHOOD FROM

Transport

Other 8'Orvices and misr, l:( necu' #lQUrCes -

_.._------~ r--------------------------~~----------.
~ ~--------~-----------~
Earning
TOTAL
Self.l'J-l-pporting
Ea.rning
TOTAL
S",lf-supporting
Earning
depeudaats
persons
dependants
pera'lns
dependa.nts
e----""',--__"________
r------A-----, ..---_..A-_---, r-~----, ,-_ _..A..----,.
M ..I_ Females
Ma.les
Females
Males Fellmles
Males Females
Males Females
Males Fema.les
Malf's Females
(36)

(37)

(38)

(39)

(40)

(41)

380

810

153

460

125

318

359

7."

114

459

117

318

.59

23

79

299

771

50

59

459

45

(42)

(43)

(44)

(45)

142

2.846

2,'(65

2,067

141.

2,'198

2.670

2.080

1,326

1,833

84-9

141

1,438

829

1,163

13

7

9

i5

1

14

54

95

32

9

6

8

14

5

7

20
318

5

1
15

21

20

1

16

14

1

9

I

13

2

8

1

S

1

1

1

..

(48)

(49)

567

7'1iJ

2.198

.80

:;'57

:a.UO

14-6

477

1.687

414

275

415

4-

7

(46)

1

7

5

26

84

17

5

88

1

6

7

3

5

..

9

79

30

B. II-Secondary Means
NUMBER OF PERSONS DERIVING THEIR

Cultivation of owned land
Livelihood Ola.sse~

Ou/ti'Vation oj

,-----------------------.~------------------~e_------------.~--------------~

TOTAL

(1)

Self-supporting
persons

Males

Females

(2)

(3)

ToTAL

Earning
dependants

1t.

,.--..A----..,

Males Female B

Males

Females

Males Females

(5)

(6)

(7)

r---A

(4)

r---...A

"

(8)

(9)

Self-supporting
persons

Males Fema.les
(11)

( 10)

BIXANER (NORTH)

18

1,844

1.301

372

959

3.104

20

I Cultivators of land wholly or mainly
owned.
II Cultivators of land wholly or mainly
unowned.
Cultivating labourers

930

3.099

IV Non.cultivating owners of land; Agricultural ren.t receivers

8

2

7

385

197

352

198

101

184

Hi

45

Total All Classes (both Agricultural
agricultural)
.

&

Non-

All Agricultural Classes

21

972

8.283

974

1.886

366

939

8.104

539

1.652

10

930

3,099

32

47

7

3

504

1,604

1

1

8

13

3

m

All Non-agricultural Classes .,
(Persons who derive their Principal means
livelihood from)
V Production. other tha.n cultiva.tion.

of

VI Commerce

51

VII Transport

136

SO

1

1

2

2

18

33

179

435

234

356

7

14

94

178

130

135

62

12

55

6

9

6

1

1

VIII Other services and miscellaneous souroes.

8'1

123

1

2

1

13

79

1

33

8

1

92

194

165

21

NUMBER OF PERSONS DER1VING THEIR
Li velihood Classes

(1 )

'1'otal Atl Classes (both Agricultural & )lonagricultural)
All Agricultural Classes
I Cultivators of land wholly Or mainly
owned.
n Cult.ivators of land wholly or m~inly
unowned.
111 Cultivating labourers

TOTAL

Self.supporting

Earning

,---.A. _ _--,

persons

dependants

r-----..A...--~

,..--_Jo-___"""

Males

Fema.les

Males

Females

Males

Females

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

(3li}

826

287

894

90

132

197

581

54

564

21

746

161

679

84

67

77

561

46

392

120

351

67

41

53

421

33

414

10

353

41

328

17

21S

24,

138

11

136

~

1

2

1

2

1

1

IV Non.cultiva.ting owners of land; Agrioultural rent receivers
All Non-agricultural Classes ..
{Persons who derive their Prinoipal means of

livelihood frOYIl)

V Produotion

oth~r than

I

80

oultivation.

126

15

10~

1

VI Commerce

4

VII Transport

2

2

2

VIII Other services miseellaneou.e souroe.

8

15

S

6

65

120

26

65

109

1

22

4

21

1

8

12
1

8

9

2
6

9

3

2

31

of Livelihood -( Oontd.)
SEOONDARY MEANS OF LIVEI.IHO()D FROM

..,..------------------------------------------------------------_~

lihnployment
cultivating
, - - _ - - -_ _
_ _ _ _ _ _as
__
.A. _ _ _ _ labourer
_________

unowned
_
_ _ _ _ Zand
_ _ _ ----....
Earning dependants

TOTAL

_--.A.----~

,-----~-__.

Males

Females

(12)

(13)

Self-supporting
persona

H,nt
agricultural
_ _on
__
_ _ ...A.-_ land
_______

~

Earning
dependants

r-----"-----.. r----'-----.

Males

Fe ma.les

Males

Females

(14)

(15)

(16 )

( 17)

Self-supporting
persons

TOTAr.

Males Females

~

Earning
dependants

r ; - - - " - - - -.. ,----_..__----., ,----......,__~

Ma.les Fetnales

Males Females

(1.8)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22~

Males

(23)

Females

t24)

(26)

,SUB-DIVISION RURAL

608

1.849

23

320

5

18

320

18

11

11

7

11

529

1,648

21

319

3

18

319

15

11

8

7

11

25

44

8

317

8

317

9

7

2

504

1,604

4

4

1

3

3

1

2

P

9

2
11

2

79

201

43

126

7

4

29

71

2

1

2

1

3

2

1

2

1

3

2

11

3

SECONDARY MEANS OF LIVELIHOOD FROM

.-

Earning
dependants

TOTAL

_----A------,.
Males

Females

,-------"--.,
Males
Females

Transport
_..__
Self-supp orting
persons

,-Males

Other se"tJices and miscellaneous sources

Earning
dependants

--. .---

------"----

TOTAL

,.-------'----,

Fetnales

Males

Females

(41)

(42)

(43)

Self-supporting
persons
r-Males Females

Earning
dependants.
,..--__
..A.-----..

Males

Females

44)

(45)

(46)

(47)

( 4fl)

(.9)

Males Femalea

(;'0)

(07)

(38)

(39)

(40)

23

33

119

2

108

11

2

546

161

504

50

42

111

9

25

III

2

100

11

2

521

10?

488

46

33

61

7

23

60

52

8

290

38

280

22

10

16

2

2

38

37

1

215

62

194

24

21

38

9

7

7

2

7

14

13

8

8

2

13

11

8

8

8

8

2

2

7

7

25

54

16

3

2

3

3

1

4

2
1

.2
1

17

9

2
2

51

12

3

[j

48

32

B. IX - Secon4atJ" Meane
NUMBER 0]7 PERSolilS DElRIVIlCG THEIR
~--

-----___.._-~--------~

OultivatiOIl of owned land
Livelihood

Cmsses

Self-supporting
persons

TOTAL

r=---.A.---.,
Males Females

r---~-.,

Males

Females

--,

Earning
dependants

Self _supporting
persoDS

TOTAL

r---~-~

Kales

OultivtUion Of
_.._

,-------

Females

, - - - - -"--_--,
;\lales Females

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Total All Classes (both Agrioultural and. Nonagricultural)

693

1,001

62

7

631

994

1.469

All Agricultural Classes

649

992

23

1

626

991

1,348

I Cultivators of land wholly or mainly
owned
II Cultivators of land wholly or mainly
unowned
III Cultivating labourers

612

985

612

985

1,201

2

2

2

35

5

23

I

12

44

9

39

8

5

8

6

7

4

21

2

19

1

(8)

(9)

r---..A..--~

Males

Females

(10)

(11)

BIB:A.IIEB (BOVTB)

IV Non_cultivating owners of land;
cultUral rent receivers

All Non-agricultural Classes

Agri-

..

(Persons who derive their Principal means 6f
livelihood from).
.
.
V Production other than cultlvatlon
VI Commerce

VIII Other services and miscellaneous sources

1

13

I

633

867

243

769

240

769

238

119

2

3

24

26

123

45

98

3

1

35

10

26

2

2

32

4-

I

2

1

55

29

48

3

VII Tr&nsport
l~

707

2

2

1

NUMBER OF PERSONS DER.IVING THEIR
Production other than cul#"ation

OOf'WTnerc~

Livelihood Classes
Self-suppor ting

TOTAL

parsOIlS

.--. , - - - . A . - - - - ,
Females
..

Males

(I)

Males Females

Earning
dependants
,---A--_--..,
Males Fema.les

..--

--------------------~
Self. supporting

TOTAL

......

,---_"____
Males Females

persons

-,----......._._...,.
Ma.les Fetna.les

(26)

(27)

(28,)

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

3.036

1,828

1,997

741

1,039

879

1,198

1,019

189

All Agrieultural Classes

3,007

1,573

1,979.

739

1.028

834

1,181

831

I Cultivators of land wholly or mainly
owned.
II Cultivators of land wholly or mainly
unoWned.
III Cultivating la.bourers

1.311

23

8~2

14

419

9

93

4.1

1,680

1,547

1.076

724.

804

823

1,085

'ReM1 All masses (both Asricultural and NODaitricultutal) .

IV Non-cultivating owners of land;
cultural rent receivers

Agri-

All Non-agricultural Classes
(Persons who derive their Principa.l means of
livelihood from)
V Production other tha.n cultivation
VI Commerce

3

1,004

788

{35}

235

1

3

13

3

8

1

5

2

1

29

47

18

2

11

t6

15

15

8

16

44

7

2

9

42

6

2

6

15

12

8

7

I

2

1

7

VII Transport
VIII Oiher services and miscella.neous sources

2

I

3

1

33
of Livelihood-( Contd.)
SECONDARY MEANS OF LIVELIHOOD FROM

-----------------,
----------------"--------------------- - - -- --_-- -Rent
unowned land
Employment as cu/ti<vating laboure:r
on agricultural land
___

~

_____

~

,--~

__

~

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _A._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ • _ _ _ _ ----,.

r----------_,.__-~--------_,

E ..rning

TOTAL

dependants
r--'--_A._---~

J.\.Iales
{I :!}

r - - - -..A-------s

Self supporting
persons

,-- _ _ _ _A_ _ _ _ ~

Earning

Selt-supporting
persons
r----A..--~ ~-- _;,.._---,
Males Females Males Females
TOTAL

dependa.nts
, , - - -_

_.A_ _ _ ~

Females

Males

Fflmales

Males

Females

1\1a168 Females

{l3}

( l4)

(15}

(16)

(17)

( 18)

(19)

{20}

(21)

(22}

(23}

Earning
dependants
r----"-----,.
1\1:ales Females

(25)

SUB-DIVISION RURAL

602

464

1,485

2,270

382

29

1.,103

2,241

28

50

26

2

2

48

577

422

1,481

2,263

380

26

1.,101

2,237

22

50

20

2

2

48

432

39:>

741

924,

350

12

391

912

740

1,339

30

14

710

1.325

20

50

20

2

lUI
2

3

24

24

25

42

4

7

2

8

2

10

8

3

3

1

3

2

8

4

1

3

1

2

7

28

1

2

•

6

6

3

5

5

1

1

:2

48

1

SECOXDARY MEANS OF LIVELIHOOD FROM

-,

~

------------.,

Transport
,---

Earning
dependtlnts

Self-supporting
persons

TOTAL

,....-- - - _ - A - -_ _ - .

,--~

_ _ . A _ __ _

~

, - - - - _ - A - - -_ _ ---..

---,
Earning
dependants
,---_.....J.-__ ~
Males Females

Other services and miscellaneol B source 8
r--Earning
Self-snpporting
'J OTAL
dependants
persons
..--_ _ -A.. _ _ --.

~_-'---~

---

,r----A-..,_-........._.

1Iales

Females

Males

Females

J.\.tales

Fe r ,oa1es

( :3" \

(37)

(3S}

(39)

(40

(H)

(42)

(43)

(44)

45)

(46)

(47)

(48)

(49)

357

71"1

34

458

17

318

1.7

140

2,300

2,604

1,563

517

737

2,087

350

769

33

457

17

318

16

139

2,271.

2.563

1,547

514

724

2,049

1.036

1,795

569

124-

467

I,G7I

1,223

767

969

390

254-

377

,>2
297

19

709

12

7
457

8

12
318

4

139

1

MaIrs

Females Males

4

2

2

7

8

1

1

1

7

6

1

1

I

1

F, males Mn'es Females

2

2
1

1

13

38

1

4

5

3

8

1

7

29

41

16

6

4

5

'11

4

6

3

1

::s

'~

2

..

9

33

5

2

4

31

34

B_ II-Secondary Means
NUMBER OF PERSONS DERIVING THEIR

r----------------------------------------Oulti<vation oj owned land
Oulti·vation oj
Livelihood Clusses

~----------~-----------~

~------------~

Earnin~
TOTAL
Self-supporting
dependants
perSODS
,.----_.__-~ r - - - ~-----., r----"-----., r - - - ..A- _ _ _ --.,
r - - - -"-----.
Males Females
Males lfemales
lUales Females Males Females Males Females

Self-support.ing
perBons

TOTAL

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(9)

(8)

(10)

(11)

BIKANER DISTRICT
Total All Classes (both Agricultural and Nonagricultural)

1.297

102

1.238

7

5

3

4

5

All Agricultural Classes
I Cultivators
of land wholly or mainly
Qwned
II Cultivators of
land wholly or mainly
unowned
III Cultivating labourers

3

46

59

56

947

573

808

188

4

5

55

361

23

105

21

220

21

103

32

139

4

5

3

2

2

IV Non-cult.ivating owners of land; Agricultural rent receivers

2

2

1,290

97

1,235

46

55

51

892

212

785

83

V Production other than cultivation

100

22

86

13

14

9

235

32

212

9

VI Commerce

316

24

301

7

15

17

72

58

64

5

VII Transport

9

8

1

2

, '50

22

45

11

865

840

25

23

, 535

100

464

58

All Non-agricultural Classes
(Persons who derive their Principal means of
livelihood from)

VIII Other services and miscellaneous sources

26

NUMBER OF PERSONS DERIVING THEIR

Production other than cultivation
Livelihood Classes

OO'lnmerce

r-------------------------A-----------------------~

Self-supporting
persons

TOTAL

Earning
dependants

r------"----.,

r--...A-.---,.

(1)

r-----------------------------~
TOTAL
Self-supporting

Males Females

persons
,.-----'-----.,
Males Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

36

Total All Classes (both Agricultural and NODagricultural)

472

453

196

118

276

335

418

237

141

All Agricultural Classes ..

185

244

89

81

96

163

52

5

33

9

3

5

2

4

1

47

3

28

175

239

83

79

92

160

3

2

3

1

2

I

2

2

28'

209

107

3'

180

172

366

232

lOS

V Production other than cultivation

140

112

45

9

95

103

44

25

26

VI Commerce

44

50

8

19

36

31

242

183

35

32

VIr Transport

17

11

3

7

1

69

21

40

3

I CuIt.ivators of land wholly or mainly
owned
II Cultivators of land wholly
or mainly
unowned
III Cultivating labourers
IV Non-cultivating owners of land;
culLural rent receivers

Agri-

All Non-agricultural Classes
(Persons who derive their Principal means of
livelihood from)

VIII Other services and miscellaneous

sources

86

9

8

47

46

9

40

38

2

36

35

oi Livelihood-( Oontd.}
SECONDARY
MEANS
OF
LI_
VELIHOOD
FROM
.A.
_______
____
__
______
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ._ _ _ _ _- - - - - - - _ _ . .

unowned land

----------.,
Earning dependants
r----"---~

Males

Feme.le3

(12)

(13)

--

Em,ployment as oulti·vating labourer
------------~

Salf-supporting

TorAL

- " - - - ---..
Females

r-- Males
(14)

persons
, -_ _
_ ..A- _ _ _ - ,
M,)'les

Females

-,

Earning
dependants
r---...A-~

Males Females

Rent On agricultural land

, - - - - - - ---- - - " - - - - - - - - - - - - ,
TOTAL

Self-supporting
persons

,-----""-----,.
Males Females

Earning
dependants

r---......_---.,

r---......_----,

Males

Males Females

Females

(15)

( 16)

(17)

(IS}

(19)

(20)

(21)

(22)

3

17

86

25

15

20

12

1

1

1

6

.

1

(23)

(24)

(25)

5

15

URBAN

139

385

48

89

31

32

256

13

12

6

II7
32

5

139

6

7

5

6

6

7

1

1

1

101

129

35

77

25

23

23

21

41

11

8

53

5

5

5

11

9

9

71

42

3

10

74

10

41

33

3

36

SECONDARY MEANS OF LIVELIHOOD FROM
-'--------- ------Transport
TOTAL

14

19

1

14

1

0

.>

3

20

15

,.----

Self-supporting
persons

r-----"------, , - -

24

5

Earning
dependants

5

......_--

TOTAL

,..----..A.._ _- ,
Fe.~1ales
:\Iales Females Males

--.. ,.----"-----.

Males

Females

]\falfls

Females

r---..A-..---..
]\f.lles

Females
(47)

(37)

(38)

(39)

(40)

(41)

(42)

(43)

(44)

(45)

(46)

277

201

53

51

18

1

35

50

1,611

744

808

19

5

5

5

954

397

19

3

1

I

645

154

2

4

4

300

......

---------,.
Earning

Self-su.pporting
persons

(36)

14
14

Other 6ervices and mi8cellaneous sources

------------.,. , - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - " - Earning
dependants
.,------"-----,.
;\Iales
Females

1

.:-.

1

7

1

dependants

r----"----,.
MaL,s Females
(48)

(19)

173

803

571

497

116

457

281

303

6

342

148

240

186

109

114

13]

4

2

3

I

I

5

1

5

35

50

657

347

311

57

348

290

11

9

86

61

43

~3

43

56

2

2

68

25

31

6

:17

19

5

6

7

83

20

14

1

9

10

2

16

32

470

241

223

45

247

11)6

258

196

48

51

13

IS

25

15

9

4

207

151

4

3

2

4

2

11

7

29

18

18

32

1

1

36

B. ll-Secondary M.eans
NUMBFR DE PERSONS DERIVING THEIR

---------------------------------------

OuU;;'vation of

Oulti'Vation of owned land

Li velihood Cla&ses

'rOTAL
. . . - - _ _- A - - - - - . "

1\-lales

~'emales

(2)

(3)

(1)

._---

_,._

~---

---.. "...----------'---- ..;..._,
TOTAL

8eU-supportin;!:
persons
" -_ _ -A. _ _ _ --.,,

,--_ _ _ ....... _ - - "

1\lales Fernalee

lHa,les

(4)

Earning

d~8Ddants

Females

(6)

(5)

Self-supporting
persons
,,----"----., "----"'------.,,
Males Females Males Fema,les
(11)

(10)

(9)

(8)

(7)

BIKANER DISTRICT
636

Total All Classes (both Agricultural And Nonagricultural)
All Agricultural Classes

85

586

46

50

39

608

320

534

157

22

231

20

105

20

220

20

103

2

9

I Cultivators of land wholly or mainly
owned
II Cultivators of land wholly or mainly
unowned
III Cultivating labourers

2

IV Non-cultivating owners of land; Agricultural rent receivers
All Non-agricultural Cla.ses
(Persons who derive their Principal means of
livelihood from)
V Production other than cultivation.

85

586

46

98

22

85

13

VI Commerce

314

24

299

7

VII Transport

(j

586

89

514

52

13

9

204

17

182

7

15

17

52

II

44

4

21

5

21

300

56

267

6

218

VIII Other services and miscellaneous sources

39

139

196

26

22

13

NUMBER OF PERSONS DERIVING THEIR

,-

..A..

COTn'»Mrc6
-'--.
Self-8Upporting
persons

Production other than cultivation

Livelihood Classes
TOTAL

(1)
Total All Classes (both ~cultural and Nonagricultural)
All Agricultural Classes

I Cul1>ivators

of land wholly or mainly
owned_
I I Cultivators of land wholly or mainly
unowned.
III Cultivating labourer.!!
IV Non-cultivating owners of land; Agricultural rent receivers_
All Non-agricultural Classes
(Persons who derive their Principal means of
livelihood from)
V Production other than cultivation.

41

Self-supporting
persons
,.-------"------..
Males Females

Earning
dependants

'l'OTAL

,.--_ _ -A.

-. ,r----------"
Males Females

Males Females

Males Females

Mdes

Females

(26)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

261

333

135

85

128

248

143

71

65

12

181

243

85

81

96

162

45

3

26

8

2

4.

2

4

44

3

25

173

239

81

79

92

160

1

1

2

2

80

90

50

4

30

86

98

6S

39

52

68

30

1

22

67

5

18

4

VI Commerce

,2

2

1

1

2

74

40

19

11

VII Transport

4

1

I

1

1

". III Other services and miscellaneous souroos

22

18

9

1.0

4

20

15

....

~

3

7

17

12

37
of LiveUhO«Ml--(OQntd.)
SECONDAny MEA.NS OF LIVELIHOOD FROM

-----------------.-------------------------_.
- - - ------------- ~
Rent on agricultural land

--"-~

i'l!J,n.d
ETnployment €M _____________
cfJ(.lti.nzti3g labourer
-",,,,Wn.ett
- ""'---___
-"'._ - _____ ------_.A..
-.,

Earning dependants
,-~

- ~..._ _,.._

Sel£-suppo..ting
persollll

TOTAL

---. _-...

,-:--_...A

Males

Femalea

Males

(12)

(13)

( 14)

...

,.---_ _ .A

F_ales

Males

Fe-:rnales

(15)

(16)

(17)

II

,.--__________ ..A.. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ -..,

Earning
dependants

Self-supporting
persons

TOTAL

Earnins
depenuaDts

.,----...J.-~

r---..A---~

" . . . . - - _ A __ _ -"",\

,,---_...1-----...,

Males Females

Males Females

Males Fernales

Males Females

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21)

(~2)

10

84

G

1

6

1

1

1

1

1

(25)

(24)

(23)

UlUIAN NON-CITY

74

163

Bl

87

21

2

126

6

11

6

11

117

5

6

5

6

2

S

5

5

...

1

72

3'7

25

76

15

22

10

16

40

6

8

1

1

I

5

5

2

2

1

{}

5

42

1

1

S

10

73

10

40

9

15

36

3

33

3

SECONDARY MEANS OF LIVELmOOD FROM
.

,....

~

Ea'i'D.ing
depertde.nts

....._

r

-~-=.;.

TOTAL

.

.,

SeW-suppMfling
per_

Male!!!

E'eHlales

Males

:FetnaIes

Male'S

Fe:lnaleEl

(36)

(37)

(38)

<'9)

(40)

(41)

78

59

15

9

1

19
]9

......

Earning
dependants

__"___~---------..

rTOTAL

Males

Earning
dependants

r----"-------

r---.A..--~

....Femal_
--....... Males Females Males Females Male s FotriRlos
r-------A------..

I

SeW-supporting
persons

(42)

(43)

(44)

(45)

(46)

(47)

(48)

(49)

14

D

1.108

481

670

126

53!

. .9

3

920

389

468

112

462

277

3

830

164

290

6

340

148

234

232

171

105

III

127

3

2

2

1

1

1

3

1

II

182

95

lOB

26

19

1{)

26

10

12

.,7

7

4

123

89

76

59

58

18

9

1

18

7

9

55

29

t

3

Other lIemCeB and miacellaneau8 Bouree8

Tra~

9

7

1

14
7

7

..
9

1

18

3

10

88

82

16

19

14

7

3

7

4,7

49

38

B. ll-Secondary Means
_ _ _OF
__
_ _ _ _ . r -DERIVING
______
____
NUMBER
PERSONS
THEIR

,..--Oultivation of owned land
r - - - - - - - ______- - A -

Livelihood Classes

Self-supporting
persons

TOTA.L

(1)

,----_,.._~

, - -_ _ -A- _ _ _ ---,

Ma.les

Females

Males

Females

(2)

(3)

(4 )

to)

Culticvation oj
--,.

r--

Self-supporting
persons

TOTAL

Earning
dependants
r---- -"-----,

r - - - " " ' _ _ - - ' r---..A..----,

Males

Females

Males Females Males Females

(6)

(7)

(9)

(8)

(10)

(11)

BIKANEB

All Ciasses (both Agricultural and Nonagricultural) •
All Agricultural Classes

661

17

652

9

17

389

253

274

7

5

3

4

5

33

130

3

:I Cult.ivators of land wholly or mainly

4

5

4

5

1

'ro"~

owned.
I I Cultivators of land wholly or mainly
unowned.
III Cultivating labourers

3

I

130

30

3

2

2

IV Non.cultivating owners of land: Agricultural rent receivers.

All Non-agricultural Classes ..
(Persons who derive their Principal means of
livelihood from).
V Production other than cultivation.

654

VI Commerce
VII Transport.

649

5

2

1

I

2

2

12

647

644

10

~---.....____----,.

(1)
Total All Classes (both Agricultural and Nona.griculfural)

Males

Females

(26)

(27)

211

120

(2S)

61

31

31

15

30

2

20

47

20

1

24

11

1~7

17

2

29

3

226

44

PERSONS DERIVING THEIR

Oonnnerce

Production other than cultivation
Self-supporting
persons
,---"---,.
l'Ifales Fema.les

271

10

r-------------------------~----------------------,.

TOTAL

123

1

~UMBER Ol<~

Livelihood Classes

306

17

2

2

3

VIII Other aervices and miscellaneous sources

12

Earning
dependants

r-----~-----------------------A-

TOTAL

,---.....".___----..

,----,..JI.__.__---.

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males Females

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

33

150

87

275

166

76

2

']

4

1

4

1

7

I Cultivators of land wholly or mainly
O"wned
II Cultivators of land wholly or mainly
unowned
III Cultivating labourers

1

1

1

1

3

2

2

2

IV Non.cultivating owners of land:
cultural rent receivers

Agri-

1

1

2

..

207

119

57

33

150

86

26S

88

44

15

8

73

36

All lfon-agricultural Classes

VI Commerce

42

VII Transport

13

VIII Other services and miscellaneous sources

64

48

7

19

31

35

29

9

4

27

Self· supporting
persons

,...-.....___.....,

All Agricultural (,'lasses

(Persons who derive their Principal means of
livelihood from)
V Production other than cultivation

31

6

33

21

(35)

21

3

2

2

2

164

69

24

39

7

22

168

143

16

21

10

2

51

12

25

3

39

of Livelihood-(Ocmcld.)
SECONDARY MEANS OF LIVELIHOOD FROM

-'

Employment

unQW11.ed.land

..1>-----

culti'Vatinq labourer

, - -_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _all
...A....-_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ""'"'"'I

----.,

Earning dependants

TOTAL

r-:--------A----......

r - - - - --'-----="

Males

FeInales

Maled

Females

(12)

(13)

(H)

( 15)

65

222

17

2

30

130

30

130

Self-supporting
persons
,_---- --"-- - - - - ,
Males
Femalos
(17)

(J 6)

Earning
dependants
r-----"-----..,
Males Females

Bent on agriculturallanti

-------,

r - - - - - - - _ : _ ___ .A... _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ---,

Self-supporting
persona

TOTAL

r-----"---- -, r-----"------,
Males Females Males Females

(I8)

(19)

(2(1)

(21)

(22)

";

2

19

14

14

7

1

(23)

F.arning
dependants

__ ----"----~
Males Females
(24)

(26)

(lITY

.,

10

1

1

1

7

7

35

92

10

1

10

1

19

14

14

1

13

';

1

!5

1

1

14

I

46

Ii

5

6

29

27

14

1

1

17

12

5

5
14.

SECONDARY MEANS OF LIVELIHOOD FROM
-..,.

Earning
dependants
.~

---.

r-TOTAL

---.

Other Btlf"I1icu and miaceUaneOUl aourCe8

Tranaporl

---

Earning
dependants

SeU-supporting
persons

TOTAL

,..----"------. ,..-----'-----Fe:rnales Males Females
--- Males

--.

Self-8upporting
Earning
dependanM
persons
,---...A.----.. ,--_..A..--~
Males Females Males Female.

Foemales

Ma.les

Females

Males

Females

(36)

(37)

(38)

(39)

(40)

(41)

(42)

(43)

(44)

(45)

(46)

( 4,7)

(48)

(49)

199

142

39

42

1

21

41

509

260

238

48

271

212

2

5

5

34

8

29

4

5

4

1

1

15

4

4

16

2

17

:199

140

33

17

7

8

152

122

3

3

1

4

2

II

7

~6

9

11

32

42

12

1

21

41

2

13
8

13

1

1

2

2

4

:3

4

208

475

252

~O9

44

266

60

42

33

[>

27

2

2

42

15

19

3

23

_-

5

6

7

26

13

l(}

1

16

12

2

!I

32

~47

182

147

:~.-:;

200

4

4
I

37

12

14

.0

B. Irr-Employers, Employees and Independent VVorkers
ALL INDUSTRIES AND SERVICES
Administratiye Unit

0
Z

Employers

CD

(l)

Independent
Worker I!

r_----"----_,

r----~---~

ll'emales

Males

Females

]'tIales

Females

Males

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8 )

(9)

(10)

'J:
00

Employees

,----~--"--- -~--,

r-..::....-.-----_,}.._----~-___,.

Oii

------t-:-.

-"----

TOTAL

Persons

MalWi

(2)

.......

Females

1

Bikaner District Total

43.534

39.427

4107

491

15

17,445

1,895

21.491

2,197

2

Bikaner District Rural

4,065

3.659

406

15

2

1.379

96

2,265

308

8

Bikaner (North) Sub-Division Rural

2.943

2,677

266

9

1,121

68

1,647

198

4

Bikwner (South) Sub-Division Rural

1,122

982

140

6

2

258

28

718

110

;5

Bikaner Distriot Urban •.

39,469

35,768

3,701

476

13

16,066

1,799

19,226

1,889

6

Bikaner District U. N. C.

5,682

4.934

748

131

4

1,488

308

3,315

436

Bikaner City

33,787

30,834

2,953

345

9

14.578

1,491

15,911

1,453

7

Sub-divit'lion (J'3

Sub-division 0'2 Rearing of small animals and insects

Administrative Unit

(1)

,.------------------~-------------------_,r_--------TOTAL
Employers
Emplo')'ees
Independent
TOTJ.L

Workers

r _ - - ---'--------, r_---.:A..---~ r_-----"-------. ,.- - - - - " -

-:--. r _ - - - - " - - - - - . ,

Males

FeIn alee

M alea

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Fetnalee

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

(34)

(35)

(86)

1

Bikaner Distriot Total

JI

Bikaner Distriot Rural

3

Bikan~1" (N ortl'i) ~b~Di~isi~ R1l1'al •.

•

BikMle1" (Sout~ 8u.bo-Dtvtlawn Rural ••

Ii

Bikanu DUtrict Urban

e

Bikaner Distriot U. N. O.

16

7

Bika.., Oi*y

"

20

20

ro.

Su b-divieioa

Sub-division 0'5 Hunting (inoluding trapping and game propagation)

~

r--------------Employers

~-----"----------

Ii

ToTAL

'5
w

Admini.trative Unit

0)

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

(51)

(52)

(53)

(54)

(55)

(56)

(57)

(58)

Bikaner Distriot Rural

3

BikBn.r (North) Sub-Division Rural ••

4

Bikaner (South) Sub-Division Rural. .

Bikaner District Urban
Bikaner Dispict U. N. C.

?

Eikaner City

To-r-AL

Males

a

5

---------., r---------Independent

,-------'------. r----_._...__---;;-~ ~---_",_---~ r--_-.;.A_ _ _ _ M

Bikaner District Total

6

Employees

Workers

1

..

".

~--~------.

Males

l!·em.19~

1.0 Inclustriel and Services by Divisions and Sub-divisions.
Sub-division 0'1 Stock Raising

Di<visio1l 0 Primary Indtntr;I!J not e/Je<where spe,:ifit'd

r---------

-------, ,------------- -----~

- ----_,._,-

TOTAL

Employers

Employees

~--~--~

~--~--~

~--~--~

lnd€'pendent
\'\Torkers
~--~-~

Males Females

Males Females

Males Femaies

Malee Females

(1'1)

( 12")

119

TOTAL

~

Employers

'Males Females

(16)

(17)

(JH)

(19)

(20)

26

19

1

300

25

299

188

14

B

166

14

sa

4

93

7lS

10

2

161

18'

17

1
1

ff

1

6

107

11

12

Plantation Industries

---- ____J>;_________
EulployeTs

.r---..A-.. _ _"

Employees
~

___

~

1JIalee Pemales Males Femn;les
(87)

(ag)

(39)

(40)

a

Males Femalc3
(21 )

Males Females

(22)

(24)

25

16

1

168

14

2

4

93

4

73

10

75

10

2

134

11

131

11

14

89

""
:a

11

28

1

103

10

J

:\lales Females

-

(26)

(25)

283

J.

14

168
93

2

•
•

!18

6

1

11'1

o

"

~8

6

94

7

Sub-division 0'4 Forestry. w(Y.)d cutting and collection of products no'_
ehewhere
____
_ _ _ _ _soecilied
..A. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ---...

'-., r

Independent

,--_ _ _ J... _ _ _ _ ---...

,-----"-____ -, r- - --../~---~ r----A--

Males

Females

Males

.Females

Males

(41 )

(-42)

(f8)

(4:4)

(!f5)

17

Independent
Worke.r"

Employees

Employers

TOTAL
~

::i

Ind.-.pendent
\Vorkers

(23)

96

\Vorkers
_____ ,.--- _ _
_ .A-_ _ _

----------------._

__ J___-_---... ~ - .....---, ,---..--'-----._ ,-----"--------

(15)

( 14)

(13)

-

F..=ployees

Fem.ales

---,

Malel!l

Females

Males

Fexnales

(47)

(48)

(49)

(60)
1

1

•

•

---

17

3

1

.t---.k-_~

Employees

. . . . Pematas
(~)

~

1

7

Malee Pemales

;;A._ _ _ _ ---.,

Males Fem'ale'!

(64)

, - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

- ..

EmploYPTs

TOTAL

=---------------~
Employees
Indppendpnt
WOFkerl!l

,------"------, r-----...__----, r----~- - - - , r- - - _ . _ _ - - - _
Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Fema.les

(68)

(69)

('70)

(71)

(72)

(78)

(74)

718

'1

26

32

'2

1

32

2

1

males

(86)

884

...

5

•

Independent
Workers

___-"-- ........ ,---.

(68)

1

16

- _ . A ._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - -,

EIIl1>}oyers

(!WI)

•

1

1

1

2

.,3

2

611

266

..
71

1

d
Z

321

•a
4

-A

"

7

4:2

B. IU-Employers, Employees and Independent Workers
Sub-division 1·0 Non·meta!lic mining and quarrying not otherwise classified

Sub·division 1 1
0

r - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ____ J.... _ _ _ ~- - - - - - - - - - . - - . _ _ - - - - - . .
TOTAL

Administrati,,·o Unit

Emplvyera

,...- _ _ _ _ .A.. _ _ _ ......

Females

(1)

Emplo:r<es

...-_ _ _..A. _ _ _ --.

Males

Females

(78)

(75)

(76)

(77)

~

_ _..A. _ _ _ --,

Males
(79)

Femal~B

lndept'lldent;
'V or';.era

".- _ _ _ A... _ _

~---..

Females

.Male!!

(81)

(82)

(83)

(80)

Bikaner District Total

30

1

2

29

2

2

Bikaner District Rural

30

2

1

29

S

3

Biksner (~orl;h) Sub-Division Rural 30

2

1

29

:it

Bikaner (South) Snb-D.vlsion Rural ..

6

Bikaner District Urban

6

Bika.neJ: DistJ:ict U. N. O .••

1

Bikaneor Oity

TOXAL
r-----.A..--.---.,

Males

1

"

r--- - - - ___

1

10·

1
e •

Sub-division 1'3 Metal Ulining except IrC>D ore mining
,-_.

-----.-------~---_..__-

TOTAL

Employers

~---""""----"

r---_..A. _ _ _ -"

0

~

Adm.inistr8tive Unit

4iJ

j

(1J

(84)

Enb division 1'"

-- -------------.Empl0yees
Independent

--~

~--------

-

T01:AL

Workers

r-----'--~

,..---"-- -:-----,

~---.."..___ -~

Ma.les

Fewa:es

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

FemaJeII

(Q9)

(l00)

(l01)

(102 )

(103)

(lO4)

(105)

(106)

(107)

(108)

1

BikaD8r District Total

8

Bikaner District Rural

a

Biu",er (North) Sub-Division Rural ••

4

BikaDer (South) Sub-Division Rural ••

Ii

Bikaner District UrbaD

&

Bikaner DistJ:ict U. N. C .••

V Bikaner City

Sub· division 1'6 Mica

.
d
Z

Ariministrattv8 Unit

IJ

(1)

]

r - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -........ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . .
TOTAL
Independent
EmployeE-s
Employers

r - - - ---A._ - -......

'5::

Sub· division I"

, . - -_ _..A.. _ _ _ --,

.-- _ _ _ _ ..A.. _ _ ----"""'

,--------TOTA.L

Workers

r----J...---., r--------~

Males

Females

Males

Female.

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

It'emaleM-

~123)

(124 )

(125)

(126)

(127)

(I28)

(129)

(130)

(131)

(132)

...

,..

1

Bikaner District Total

It

Bikaner District Rural

3

Bikaner (North) Sub-Division Rural o.

4,

Bikaner (South) Sub-Division Rural •.

15

Bikaner District Urban

6

Biknner Distri('t U. N. O.

7

Bikaner Cit.y

1

1

1

:.:.

...

..

'

. ..

1
a::.o>

1

...

43

in Industries and Services by Divisions and Sub-db isions-( Oontd.)
Coal :minb.g

;;;Jo._

----------------------.,.
Employers
Independent
Employee~

r---.A..----.,.

r---..A-----,

WorktJrs
r----..A..----,

Kale. Females

Males Females

Mnles Fe-nalea

(85)

(~5)

(87)

(8S)

(89)

(90)

Males

Females

(91)

(92)

Males

Females

(93)

(94)

Males

Females

Males

(95)

(96)

(97)

Fema.les
(98)

1

1

...

2

.,

a

"

•

1

8

1

7

Crude Pe~roleum. and Natural Ga.s

---- -Employera

Sub-division 1-5 Stone quarrying, clay and sand pits
,,- _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ .A.. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ -....

-----------~

Employees

r - - - A -----,. , , - - - - " - - - - - ,

Males

Fe:malea

Males

(109)

(110)

(111)

Indepenrlent
Workers

r-----A..----,

Females Males
(1l2)

(llS)

Females
( 114)

Employera

TOTAL

or- - _ _ ::A-_ _ _ - .

Employees

Males

Females

Malee

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

(116)

(ll6)

(117)

(118)

(119)

(120)

(121)

(122)

685

4

24

268

683

4

24

7S

610

Bait, 8.I~petre and saline substances
----------~-----------~

Independent
'Yorkers

4

M

r---.A.. --_. r----..A:.. ___ --, r----.A..---........,

Males Females

Males Females

Males Fe:males

.

~

..

(138)

(137)

891

2

71

268

820

Employees

Employers

TOTAL

r---.A..--.........

(l35)

268

to

Males

Females

Males

Females

(138)

(139)

(140)

(141)

(142)

...

2,443

456

388

53

345

36

-.I3

''17

3

2.055

,.-- _ _ _ .A.._ _ _ --.,.

•e

•

Divhion 2 Processing manufacture-Foodstuffs, Textiles,Leather and Prodllcls
r-_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _thereof
_ tA- _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

r----~---..

(1St)

ri

4

...

(las)

~

,a

2

10.

~

1

a

2

Employees

.

393

2

Employers

Inrlepen<ient

_ - - " - -_ _ ---, , - - _ _ -"-_ _ _ --, _-~OJ~----.

r-

7

--.,.

0
Z
,,-_ _ _ ...A.. _ _ _ .-., iCi
Independent
Workl'rs

'»

FemaJes

Males

FelL ales

(143)

(144)

(115)

(H6)

88

410

25

1,945

431

1

3

4

3

881

50

2

345

36

S

Males

4

S

36

H

(

408

22

1,584

381

I)

403

85

326

82

(

1&

6

806

7S

6

1,729

-321

a1

390

18

1,268

305

7

--=.

B. m-Emvloyers, Employees and Independent Worke:ra
Sub-division

2'0 Food Industries otherwise unclassified
r - - - --,- - - . . - r------- Sub-divisionEmployers
Employees
Independent "
--------------,~--------------

d

z
:i

...

AdJniniatrath;e Unit.

TOTAL

TOTAL

r- _ _ .A. _ _ _

-~

r-----~----~

Workers

r----..A.--_-, r-_ _ _ .A.. _ _ _ _ ~

r---~--~

1!"emales

Males

Fe:m~l.ee

(153)

(154)

(155)

(166)

136

24

248

8S

<It!

(1)

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

FelPales

(147)

(148)

(149)

(150)

(151)

(152)

201

28

14

51

B

Males

1

Bikaner DlBtrict Total

e

Dikaner District Rural

8

1

S

Bikaner (North) S. D. R.

S

1

•

Bikaner (Sonta) S. D. R.

3

15

Dikaner District Urban

201

6

Bikaner District U.N.C.

14

'1

Bikaner City

26

51

14

136

2

•

10

47

14

26

187

M

24

126

2

r---------.------TOTAL

ii

Adm.inistrative Unit.

l

(1)

1

Bilraner DiSttiet Total

•

Bikaner Disbict Rural

•
•'"

81

6

6

1137

26

Sub-diviSion 2"4

Bub-division 2·3 Sugar Industries

~

ZU

_ _ _ _ •_ _ _ _ _ ..A.. _ _ _ _. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

_

_ _ _ --.,

C

--r------TO~L

r - - - _..A... _ _ _ - ,

[ndl'poLldont
,"Yorkers
r----..A. _ _ _ -., ,. _ _ _ ..A.._ _ _ _ ....., r-_ _ Jo... _ _ _ _ --,

Males

Fetnatea

Males

Females

~,lales

Females

Malt@

Yemales

Mal_

Fexna18

(-171 )

n72}

(173)

(174)

(176)

(176)

(177 )

(178)

(17V)

(1110)

Employers

Employees

r---""""_---""_

10

Bik.ane:r (N~t.h) S. D. R •••
Bikaner (South) S. D. R.

Bikaner DistlPict Urban

m

',6

Bikaner District. U.N.C.

2

•

Bilkaner City

8

B ub-4iqQon ~·.T

Sub-division 2'8 Cotton textiles
,-::_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ;;}t:;;_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _,

~
:j

Enlployera

TOTA.L

Employees

AdmiuUHi...·live Unit
r - - - - ...... - - - - . . .

•

r:n

(I)

1'--- - - - - - . ,

r - - - - ....... - - - - . ,

r'rOXAL
Independent
Workers
r - - - - ....... - - - - - . ._---........____---:-.

Males

It'emal_

Males

Females

Malee

Females

Males

Females

Males

lI'.e~

(195)

(IV6)

(197)

(198)

(199)

(200\

(201)

{202)

(203,)

(SCK)

176

122

e28

81

68

18

1

62

"
2

20

1

e

2

3

1

Bikaner District Total

2l.7

122

29

2

Bikaner District Rural

89

4

1

3

Bikaner (Nort.b) S. D. R.

62

2

4

Bikaner (S0uth) S. D. R.

7

~

1

£o_

6

Bikaner District Urban

lAS

118

.28

<1.

10'1

118

60a

410'

6

Bikaner Dist>rict U.N.C.

88

19

6

82

19

9Y

rr

'i

Bikaner City

60

99

7

21)

99

~

S$

28

13

.4

._:.

45
in Industries and Services by Divisions and Suh-divisions-(Contd _)
Sub-division 2-2 Vegetable oil and dairy products

2-1 Graine and p'~lse8

r-----_,A.._ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - , , , - - - - - - - - ----- - - - - - - - - - - " - - - - - --- - - - - - -- -- - - - - ----,_._
Employers

Employees

IndepE"nrlent
Workers

TOTAL

Employers

EmployeeH

r------"------,

y - _ _ _ ........ _ _ ;--"'II ,,--_ _ A- _ _ --..

, - - - - - --"----~

r-------"-- --- ........

r - - - - - " - - - - - ........

Males Females Males Females

Males Females

Males

Feruales

])lale s

( Ui'7)

(159)

(160)

(lul)

(162)

(163)

(164)

10

117

5

121

l!7

349

19

1

2

3

1

139

12

3

1

132

9

7

3

(108)

1

2

9

115

2

1

7

114

5

5

...

_;..,__- -----~

Employers

r- -

Ma!es

Females

(166)

(167)

(168)

(l69)

(170)

10

1

339

11

1

1

139

U

I

132

9

S

7

2

200

"6

2

5

21

4

2

19

I)

116

21

189

3

181

7

----~-.

- -.--.,

r ___

(183)

(185)

(186)

7

~_~

1

~ub-division 2'5 Tobacco
_________________ J.,.._ ____
_____ ____________ -\
~

TOTAL

Independent
"Vorkers

(181 )

2

Females

10

Males Females Males Females

1

Males

'1

Malee Females

(184)

r;n

Females

SUO

-- -"----- - - , r-- _ _ ..A. _ _ -., , - - _-"- - - - . ,

(182)

:!f

r-----"------~::

26

_-- - -

Employees

6
Z

118

Beverages

- - --_ -

(165)

Independent
"Yorkers

Employers

r - - - - A . . - - ----,

, _ - - - - _._<---~--,

~

Employees
r-

Independent
Worker",

- ---"----- - -

«)

Z

, - - - __ ;.A_ -- - -

--..

:i
~

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

:Femalea

Males

Females

(107)

~ 188)

( 189)

(190)

(191)

(192)

(193)

(194)

9

2

'1

2

2

...

1

8
8

1

..

7

2

..

.

-

2

9

2
]

7

Wearing apparei (except footwear) and made_...J.- _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

,_ _ _ ...A-_ _ ~

Employees
r---~~---,

Malell Females Male'! Females
(206)

21

(207)

30

(208)

30

2

'7

2

I
6

'7

Sub-division 2-8 Textile Industries
~

Independent
Workers

otherwise unclassified

r - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ~----"---- - - - - - - - - --------~
TOTAL

Employers

,_.-_ _ _ -A- _ _ - - ;

r--_..A-- _._--..

Employees

Indppendent
Workers

, - - - - - " - - - - -,

,.- _ _ _ _ -A.. _ _ _ --,

~
Ii

J

Males

}<~emaJes

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

(200)

(210)

(211)

(-212)

(213)

_(2H)

(215)

(216)

(217)

(218)

i72

61

170

100

5

36

17

12P

113

1

23

1

1

12

2

1

10

2

20

1

7

3
~

3

24

'1

2

up textile goods
-r------

EmployerB

2

549

60

7

1

5

169

118

1

93

27

1

7

29

451

33

168

III

5

36

1

2

1

3

15

128

103

6

1

{;

102

7

6

36

9

128

46

B. m- Employers, Employees and Independent Workers
Sub·division 2'9 Leather, leather produots and footwear
0

r--------------------J>...-------_
--_________
-. ,.------TOTAL
Employers
Indppendent
Employees

Administrative Unit

z

Divis;Q#I oJ

r----"-------.,

I

7}

(1)

r-----"-----.

Malee

Females

Males

Females

(219)

(220)

(221)

(222)

TorAL
Workers
r----..A.. _ _ _......, r- - _ .A. _ _ -._",

r----..A. ___ -.

Males

Females

(223)

Males

(224)

(225)

Females

Males

Femal.

(226)

(227)

(228)

1

Bikaner District Total

613

64

5

149

459

64

924

23

2

Bikaner Distriot Rural

150

23

1

2

147

23

68

IS

8

Bikaner (North) S.D. B.

128

16

128

16

111

7

22

2

19

7

47

6

147

IU

41

8(i8

11

U5

20

87

3

217

21

821

S

Bikaner (South) S. D. R •••

"
Ii Bikaner District Urban
6

Bikaner Dia'orict. U.N.C.

7

Bikaner City

...

7

1

463

41

4

96

20

1

367

21

3

147

Sub·divieion 3'1 Iron Qll.d Steel ~BaBio Manufacture)
~------------

-

TOTAL

_ _ _ -.A. __________ -

Employers

.-____ J>.. ___ --, .-___
(1)

1

Bikaner District; Total

a

Bikaner DiBtrict Bural

8

Bikaner (Nort>b) S. D. R.

Employees

.A.. _ _ _ __,

r:---..A.---- ___

r--------

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _,

Independent
Workers
, - ___
A ______

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Fema-les

(243)

(244)

(245)

(246)

(2-17)

(248)

(249)

(260)

TorAL
, . . - _ - - " - . _ _ _ -:.

Maleil It'emalea
(251)

(252)

82

..

4

Bikaner (South) B.D. R .••

6

Bikaner District Urban

e

Bikaner District. U.N.C.

7

Bikaner Cit,.

...

...

8B

82

SUb-alvision 3'4 Electrical machinery. apparatus. appliancee and supplies

Bub-division

.'6

, -_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ .A.. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ --,

Employers

TOTAl:.

Acbnlnistrativ8 Unit

.;

r-----'------,

Z

1
(1)

1

Bikaner District Total

•

Bikaner District Rural

S

Bikaner (North) S. D. R •••

6

Bikaner (South) B. D. R .••

J5. Bikauer District Urban
6

Bikaner Distriot· U.N.C.

1

Bikaner City

r-- __

:J-_ _ _ _ _ .......,

Employees

Indept'ndent
Workerlil

, -_ _ _ ::A:: _ _ _ -.... , - _ _ _ .A.. _ _ _ --,

r----TOTAL

r-----.A...__-:--..

Males

Females

Males

Females

:r'::alea

Femnies

Males

Fe:males

Males

Females

(267)

(268)

(269)

(270)

(271)

(272)

(273)

(2U)

(270)

(:Z76 I

64

1

285

54

1

...

..

.

6
6

M

1

54

1

259

64

1

M

1

259

47
-in Industries and Services by Divisions and Sub- divisions-( Contd.)
Pr.cUJinIl ell: Manufacture-Metals, Ohemicab

Sub-division 8·0 Manufacture of metal products otherwise unclassified

thereoj
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ana
.A- _Proaucts
_____
- _ _ _ _ _ ,_ _ _ - ,

-"-

r:-

Employees

Independent
Employers
TOTAL
Worker:3
" . ._ _. ; A ; ; . - - - , , - _ _ .A- _ _ _ ----, r---..A..-----.,..- _ _ _.A. _ _ _ - , r----.A.-------,
Employers

Males Females Males Females Males Fem&les
(229)

(230)

.11

11

Females

(238)

(239)

(240)

(~37)

822

23

475

22

,

66

12

58

19

1

11

47

6

91

756

4

87

~.A.

_ _ --.

~ales Females

(253)

(264)

Employees
~

GI

co

(242)

462

21

1

12

58

12

2

7

11

7

6

.7

•

47

6

•

11

417

10

8

404

10

6

33

3

86

3

2

33

8

6

723

B

382

7

371

7

7

-----~------------

Employers

..

3

Females

(241)

Non-Ferrous Metals (Basic Manufacture)
__

Ma.~es

Males

(23B)

"'.

,.._._~~

Females

(235)

0
Independent
Z
Workers
___ ...A.... _ _ _ _ --..

---,

Males

(234)

91

r- _ _ .A. -

Females

(233)

(2032)

(231)

11

Males

---""\

Employees

8

'1

..

7

Sub-division 3·3 Transport; Equipment

_ _ _ _ ---,

----...,

,,-_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ..A. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

Independent
Workers

_ _ ..A.. _ _ . , f""':"--.A.----:"I

TOTAL

Employers

Employees

,.- _ _ _A. _ _ _- .

r- ------A.. _ _ _ ,_,

,.- _ _ _ ..A- - - --,

Independent
6
Workers
r_.II-. _ _ - . , Ii':'
_
4_~

.~

Males Females Males Females
(256)

(256)

(257)

(258)

80

Males

Females

Malee

Females

Males

Females

Males

(259)

(260)

(261)

(262)

(263)

(264)

(265)

10

28

Females c!
(266)

18

1

•
•
...

80

2

80

2

Machinery (other than electrioal machinery)
including Enginepr1ng Workshops

28

10

2

~

26

8

"6

18

·
6

18

7

Sub-division 3'6 Basic Industrial Chemicals, Fertiliser and Power AlcohOl
' , . - -_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ .A- _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ...,

.A.-------------r--,

Employers
~

Emp oyees

Independent
Workers

_ J e _ _ _ -., ~_---A.----. y----..A. _____

Employers

TOTAL

Employees

-r----_A_----, ,,- _ _ _ .A-

~_J...

Independent;
Workers
~
_A_ _ _---.-, CiI

___-, ,.---_

.;::

Males Females
(277)

•

(278)

Males

Femalee

(279)

(280)

72

..

M ales Females
1281}

191

..

,

6

(282)

M ales

Females

Males

It'ema.les

Males

Females

(283)

(284)

(255)

(286\

(287)

(28B)

Males
(281))

Females J5
(2go)

..

1

•
S
4,

51

72

185

7'

186

I»

6
11

i

48

B. HI-Employers, Employees and Independent Workem
sub-division 8'7 Medical

and Pharmaceutical Preparati(J:nl>

r--

0

lZ;

j

-..A------------------~

TOTAL
Administrative Unit

Sub-division 3'S

Employers

,----.A.---<_-., ,-__ __A.. _

______.._,

Employees

r----.A.----.,

Males

Females

l\1:ales

Females

Males

Females

(1)

(2IH)

(292)

(293)

(29t)

(2g:;)

(2H6)

1

Bikanor District Total

2

2

2

Bikaner District Rural

:]

Bikaner (l"orth) S. D. R.

4

Bikaner (Sout-h) S. D. R.

5

Bikanol' District Urban

2

2

t3

Bikaner Dh.trict U.N.CoO'

7

Bikaner Cit.y

2

2

Males

Females

Males

Femal. .

(2\,18)

(2'J9)

{SOO)

88

Sub· division 4'1

Sub-division 4'0 Manufacturing Lndnstries otherwise ullCla"sHied

.,g
~
...
..j3

, -_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ---A.. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ -

TOTAL
Ad:rninistrative Unit

Employers

, -_ _ _ _ ..A. _ _ _ )

(1 )

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ -----,

Employees

, , -_ _ _ ..A. _ _ _ ----,

r--- -

:A.. _ _ _ - ,

r--------

Independent
ToTAL
\Vorkere
r----..A.---...... , -_ _ .A. _ _ _ ":"'"\

Indf'lper; den t
Workers
r - - ___ J.- _ _ _

r--------'l'oTAL

~

r----.A.---"'"""

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Malee

:Fomales

Males

Females

(815)

(316)

(817)

(318)

(319)

(320)

(321)

(322)

(323)

(324)

1

1

Bikaner District Total

500

33

86

118

1

296

32

SJ

Bikanor District Rural

58

10

2

7

1

49

9

3

..

Bikaner (North) S. D. R.

87

4

37

4

Bikaner (South) E-l. D. R,

21

6

2

7

12

6

&

Bikaner Distriot Urban

442

28

84

111

247

sa

(l

Bikan6!" District U. N C.

176

18

176

18

...

7

Bikaner Cjt;y

266

10

71

10

1

84

1

111

Sub-division 4·3 Cement-Oementpipes and othercement products

••
1

Sub-division

, -_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ -A.. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ --.

~-----

0

Z

]I

...

A~ini&trative

TOTA.L
,,-___ .A. -____ -..

Unit

Employers
Employees
r----.A. - -_:-""I , - _ _ _ ..A. _ _ _ - ,

~

(1)

...

IndeJ endent
Workers

,-_ -

_.A..-"- _ _ -..

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

M ales

Females

(339)

(340)

(341)

(342)

(343)

(344)

(345)

(346)

TazJU.
v---..A.----,

(347)

(84.8)

242

'100

1

Bikaner District Total

S

B~aner District Rural

'70

18

a

Bikaner (North) S. D. R .••

'1

17

4-

Bikaner (South):S. D. R.

23

1

5

Bilraner Dist:r;ict; Urban

13

:;

8

179

91

6

Bikaner District U. N. C

2

1

]

ll'iO

83

7

Bikaner City

11

'1

.,

22

&.

13

5

8

49

ill Industries aDd Services by Divisions and Sub-divisions - (Gontd.)
Division 4 Processing and M anujacture-Not elsewhere IJpecijied

Manufacture of chemical products otherwise
unclassified

--------"----------------.,
Employers
,--_ _..A.. _ _ --.,

Males

Females

(801 )

(302)

2

r---=------. r----"----..._

,-----_;.._---~

,------'-----,

,-----'----~

~

Z

~

...

<P
00

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

(303)

(306)

(307)

(308)

(:109)

(310)

(311 )

(312)

(313)

(314)

65

1.687

168

95

272

14

1,320

154

1

2

208

31

2

"1

1

199

80

2

133

21

133

21

S

1

66

9

4

(304)

(306)

"""

63

1

63

1

76

10

2

7

1,479

137

93

265

13

1,121

:24

5

555

115

2

2~

12

525

103

6

924

22

91

237

1

596

21

7

Sub.division 4'2 Bricks, tiles and othtlr strnctural clay products

Products of petroleum and coal

-------....... _-- -- ------Employers
Employees
Independent

---~

Workers

-.A-.

r--TOTAL

r-- --~----., r---.A..-----..., r---.A..---'"""\ .,.-----"-

Males Fel'nalea Males Females
(326)

Independent
Workers

\lales Fema.les

....

(326)

,-------'---~

Employees

Males Females

2

2

Employers

TOTAL

Independent
Workers

Employees

1

2

, - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _A._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ---.,

(327)

__

Employers

----., r - - - - . . . " ' - - - - - - " " I ,

Employees
r - - -- - ..A.. ________

---.,
Indppendent
Workers
r -----"----.----,

Males Females

Males

Females

Malesj

Fern ales

Males

Females

Males

FeJDales

(329)

(830)

(381)

(332)

(883)

(384)

(836)

(336)

(337)

(388)

1

194

16

32

12

162

4

(328)

0

~

..

~
GO

a:J

1

2

4

4

3

1

190

16

32

12

1&8

120

16

26

12

94

4'4 NOll-metallic mineral producta

r---..A..--~

r-----'----'__'

Mal" Females

Males

(~\

(30l)

(350)

2

_ _ _ _ -.,

Indepenrlent
WorkerI'!
,.--_..A.. _ _ --.,

Females Mfrlea Fe=al.es
(352)

6

7

Sob-division 4"5 Robber products

- - - - - - _ _ .A. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ -

EmploYEtes

• •

4:

64

6

70

Employers

4:

4:

4

r - - - - - - - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ .A. _ _ _ _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - . ,
TOTAL
Employers
Employees
Independent
Wor-kers

r-----"----, ,.-___ .A._ _ _ --.
Males

Females

Males .

Females

(355)

(36ti)

(357)

(3&8)

oi

r----..A.-----., ,--___ . . A . . _ - - - , :i
M .. lef>

Females

Malee

Females

\859)

(360)

(3M)

(S62)

~

(SuS)

(354-)

888

109

'0

18

4-7

17

28

1

4:

1

,p:Ji

...

2
S

2

2

168

91

6

2

1

147

83

6

1

n

8

50

B. m-Employers, Employees and Independent Workers
Sub-division 4'6 Wood and wood products other than furniture & fixtur{'s

,..-_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - . A - _ _ _ _ _

C

-;;e

.;:

Employers

Employees

r------"-----,

, - _ _ _ ..A.. _ _ _ ---,

TOTAL

Z

Administrative Unit

r- --~--"------,

(l)

if.)

(1)

Sub-division 4'7

- - - - - - - - - - - - - , ,..----------Independent
'Yorkers

TOTAL

r------'--- --,

r - - - - -"'----r--..

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

(363)

(364)

(365)

(366)

(367)

(368)

(3 1;9)

(~70)

(371)

(372)

6

109

1

593

6

4

1

'4

2

2

1

2

.2

1

2

1

Bikaner District Total

708

";

2

Bikaner District Rural

'14

2

3

Bikaner (North) S. D, H

'lB

4

Bikaner (South) S. D. R.

26

2

15

Bikaner District Urban

634

5

6

Bikaner District U. N. C.

101

2

7

Biklloner City

533

3

Males

Females

MaltS

49

25

109

6

1

109

6

1

519

4

101

2

418

2

2

Dlvision {j

Sub-division 4'9 Printing and Alli.,d Industries

,..----------------- ---'-_--------- - ----------. r---------

C

~

Administlative Unit

'X>

(1)

,..-_ _ _ .A.. _ _ _ _ ,

Independent
Workers

E:mployers

Employee.

f---..A..------,

,----1-"=------,

TOTAL

Z

-c
a>

Females

TOTAL

,..- _ _ _ ..A.. _ _ _ ---.,

~

_ _ _ _ _ .A.

-----,

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

FeDlales

Males

Females

(387)

(388)

(889)

(390)

(391)

(392)

(393)

(394)

(SgS)

(396)

1,871

152

19

1

12

1

Bikaner Distriot Total

2

Bikauer District Rural

120

3

3

Bikaner (North) S. D. R.

120

3

4

Biksner (South) S. D. R .••

5

Bwaner Distriot Urban

12

1,751

149

6

Bikaner Distriot U. N. C.

6

607

12

'1

Bikaner City ••

6

1,144

187

19

6

1

6

6
13

I

6

Sub-division 5'2

Sub-division 5'1 Oonstruction and maintenance-Buildings

0
:z;
~

, _ -_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ..A.. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ---,
("

Administrat.ive Unit

Employers

TOTAL
,..-_ _ _ A. _ _ _ - ,

'0::

,

Employees

_ _ _ :.:A:. _ _ _ - ,

~

,

_ _ .A. _ _- - ,

,

Independent
Workers

TOTAL

_ _ _ .A. _ _ - - - .

(1)

.A._ _ _ - ,
r--~

w

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

(411)

(412)

(413)

(414)

(415)

(416)

(417)

(418)

(419)

;1.97

3

10

814

97

37

1

Males

Females
(420)

1

Bikaner District Total

817

2

Bikaner District Rural

40

40

86

1

3

Bikaner (North) 8. D. R.

40

40

35

1

4

Bikaner (South) S. D. R .• ,

6

Bikaner District Urban

777

1~'l

3

10

774

97

2

8

Bikaner District U. N. C.

530

9

3

6

1527

3

2

1

Bika.ner City

247

98

4

247

94

..

.,

51

in Industries and Services by Divisions and Sub-divisioDs-(Oontd.)
and
_ _Furniture
______ A
- - fixtures
_ - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ --,

SUb-division
4·8
Paper
aod
paper
,..- _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
______
__
_ ..A.. _
__
_ _ _products
__________ -_-:-,

r---.A.----:--'I

'l'<JTAL
Employers
Employees
independent
'YorKers
r- ___ .:A_ _ _ ---, r----.A.-------, ,- ____ _ _ _ _ ___ r--___ .A.___ ......._

Males Females

Males Fem'tles Males Females

Employers

(a73)

(374)

J~

('~7;;)

(376)

Employees
, - - - _ . . A . . _ _ _ -.,

Independent
Workers
r-_~:.A..._---,

Males

Females

Males

Fema]es

Males

Females

Males

Females

(380)

~381)

(382)

(383}

;;384)

(385)

1386)

'1

1

(377)

(378)

(371:1)

4

1

'1

2

1

2

1

1

1
2
8
4,

1

7

2

7

1

7

2

,.-_
_ ..A.. ______
"Vorkers

r-_-.A. __ -...,

Male.. Females

Male!:! Females

Males Females

(399)

(400)

(to!)

710

53

1,161

99

80

1

40

2

80

1

40

2

630

52

1,121

87

33

9

574

3

697

43

547

94

(Sl:l~)

(402)

·Construction and maintenance-Roads, Bridges
___
__
_ _ ..A..
_____
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ -.,
and
other
Transport
Works
Employers
_ _ _ ~ _____

Employees
~

_ _ ..A.. _ _ ~

Males Females Males Females

(421)

1

,
6

7

,..-_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ • ______ J..... _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

Independellt

EmplGyeee

r---..A..--~

(3\1n

5

Sub-division 5-0 Construction and maintenance of Works-otberwise unclassified

OonJtruction and Utilitillls
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ ..A.. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - - . - - - - - - ,

Employers

1

Independent
_
_ .A.. _ _ ___
"Vorkers

'rOTAY,

r-------.J-----.,

(425)

Employers

Employees

r-. ___ ...A:.._ _ - - - ,

r----.A.--_--.

r----.A..-_ .---.

Independeot,
Workers

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Male.

Females

(403)

(404)

(405)

(406)

(407)

(40g;

(409)

('10)

Q

Z

-;;

-~
rr.l

1

2

.:.

3

...'"

-

•

..

5
6
7

Sub-division 5-3 Construction & maintenance-Telegraph and Telephone lines

r----- ----.----

_ _ _ ..A.. - - - - - - - - - - _________ ...--.

TOTAL

Employers

Employees

r----..A..---.,

r----=---___

~---~-----.

~

Males }<'emales

~

Independent
Workers

~ _ _ _ ..A.. _ _ _ ~

M ales

Females

M ales

Females

Males

Females

Ma.les

Females

(427)

(428)

(429)

(430)

(431)

(432)

(433)

(434)

zo
•

.s::

rJ1

(422)

(423)

(424)

...

37

1

1

35

1

2

35

1

8

(426)

4,

2

5

2

6

52

B. m-BmpJo.rer~ Bmployees aDd IndepeBdeai Work"a
Sub-diTillion 6.4 Construction and maintenance operations-Irrigation and othel
agrioultural works
c)

AdDilini.~rative Unit

Z

y----- - - - - - - - -- ------"------- - -

3

i

Employers

Employees

Y"-------- - - - - - .

~--.A----.

r----.A- __ - _--.

MaltlC:
t 1)

- -----------.,

TOTA.L

Independent
Work ",rl>
,-____ -A.._-.,

Sub-division

r--------TOTAL

r----Jo----_.

Femalett

Males

Females

Males

Femal~s

Males

Females

Malee

Female.

(43e)

. (431)

(438)

(439)

(440)

(441)

(442)

(443)

(4U)

24

(436)

1

Bikaner Distldot To~al

817

2

Bikaner District Rural

18

3

Bikaner (North) S. D. R.

18

4.

Bikaner (Soutb) S. D. R.

~

Bikaner District Urban

799

6

Bikaner District U. N. C.

13

7

Rikaner City

..

14

2"'

786

D;rJ;s;Qfl 6

Sub-division 6.7 Sanitary Works aud Service;. including su\yangers
0

r-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

os
.;:::

TOTA.L

r----..A---~--.

(1)

-_-'------------------_._---., r----------

Employers

Admini!!trative Unit

rZ

5.6

Employees

...--_ _ _ .A. _ _ _ ........,

.A._____ --.,

TOT.L

Independent
Workers

,----...1-------.

r-- --_..._--- -....,.

Males

lfema.les

Males

Females

Males

.Females

Males

l'l'walps

Malee

li'emale&

(459)

(460)

(461)

(462)

(.00)

(464)

(466)

\(66)

(487)

(468)

IS

23

2

11,824

UP

1

Bikaner District Total

H

20

31

I

Bikaner Distriot Roral

18

2

18

2

929

88

8

Bikaner (North) S. D. B.

19

2

19

2

646

58

4

Bikaner (South) S. D. R.

383

30

I

Bika.ner District Urban

35

18

6

Bikaner District U. N. C .•.

23

3

7

Bikaner City

12

15

12

12

18

23

10,895

4U

3

23

1,738

103

8.9;:;7

338

16

Sub-diviMon 6.11itetail trade in foodlltalfs (incloding beverages and narcot.icB)
0

Z
~

Ad.IDinistrative Unit

..

,..----------TOTAL
r----............_----.,.

Q
<I.)

(1)

~

WOrliers

...--_ _ _ Jo... _ _ _ --.,

. , ____ . A . - - - - - .

~-Jo----~

Malea

Females

Males

Femalee

Males

Females

Malea

Females

Malee

Fem....

(483)

(484)

(485')

(486)

( 48'1)

(488)

(489)

(490)

(491)

('~

1

162

3

5.014

166

'Z1

29

230

5

~

170

60

IS

Bikaner District Rural

232

i

1

3

Bikaner (North) B. D. R.

77

Bikaner (South) S. D. &.
"6 Bikaner
Didriet Urban

156

6

6,004

185

Bi'kaner District U. N. C.

450

26

Bikaner City

Toor~

__ _ ..Jo--_---,

Bikaner District Total

7

------------------.,
,--------Independ.eDt
RmpJoyees

Eulployers

1

6

Sub-divieion 6.2

4,664

1

140

1
1

21

38

7

76

1

-

8

1

154

6

1

21

181

3

4,784

161

7.1

21

3

408

22

2

1

69

2()'

1408

..

4.376

139

53

in Industries and Services by Divisions and Sub-divisions--(Gontd.)
Sub-divisioll 5.6 Work~ and Services-Dome4ic and IlluuHrial wa.ter supply

Works and Services-ELectric Power and
Gas supply

-------"--- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ,
Employee~

Employers
r---.J,__-"-I
~[aleB

(445)

, -_ _ __A_

Indep~ndellt

__ ~

]<'emales MalE's Females
(446)

\\'orkers

r--~-__A_--~

,-~

Elnployers

, -_ _ _ .J,._ _ _ _ ~

r - - - - - ....A.. _ _ _ ~

l\'[alE's Female"

(447)

(448)

(449)

583

24

234

_ _ _ _~ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ J.- _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - - - - -

TOTAL

(450)

Fmpioyees

Femai('s

J\l :lIes

Females

(4-52)

(453)

(454 )

(451)

r---~.___A_-

(4f}5)

146

56

8

S

18
18

-

- -

-~.

IndependN.t
\\-orkers

---I

r--- _

Fema.les

:'\l"les

(4)10)

(-If>7)

d
;z:;
Cii
.;:

_.A,_ _ _ _ _ _ l

&5

1

90

2

3

8

.(

585

24

48

138

234

13

552

24

2H

!HJ

90

6

:?4

6

66

7

Sob-division 6.0 Retail trade otherwise uncla~sified
_ _ _ _ _A__ __

Employers

-------- Employee.,

..A.. _ _ - ,

Males Females

l\-fales Females

Males

Fen;alf's

(471) )

(4.1)

(72)

(478)

, 474)

(475)

(476)

(477)

I}

538

19

10,841

501

2.889

191

21

2

74

4

952

82

251

52

4

492

54
28

, ___

Males Females
(4tl\cl )

2
1

2

22

H2

7

484

US

3

175

12

117

4-

289

3

Empluyers

r - - - __ A_ _ _ _ -

(479)

(4-80)

(481)

(482)

132

7

2,7S.

182

1

34

51

4

200

30

I

199

16

51

148

12

3

52

18

1.438

88

39

4

8.551

331

2,431

lIS

17

4

Fetl:Jales
(478)

21

2

2

52

18

4

5

81

3

2.586

158

25

1

178

38

6

5H

2

2.358

114

7

Sub.division 6,3 Retail trade in textile B.nd l(>ather Goods

Iudependent
\\'orkers

Males Female. "Males Female"

4

r----...A..-----,

l\Iaiee

157

Males Female..

(496)

---,

Females

Males

207

~--~--~

(4-94- )

r- ____ ...A.. _ _ -

2.638

~--~--~

(4-93)

Enlployees

1\1 a lc-:-;

Retail trade in f'\l.el (including petrol)
Employees

--,

419

- - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ...A.. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - ,

Employers

------, ~
Independent
Workers

---------"----------- ---

-~------,

rndependent
Workers
,
_ _ ...A-_ _ - ,

~--~--~

, -_ _ -

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ -A. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ -

TOTAL

ElupJoyerB

Rlnployet:s

r----A.----,

,.--_ _ _ -A-__ - - - ,

, - - - - ..A.. _ _ _ _ ,

_ _ _ _ _-

__ - ,

Ii

Independf-nt
Workers

_Males

Femal_

Males

Females

]l,fales

Female"

(497)

(498)

(499)

(500)

(501)

(1)02)

(503)

(">04)

67

Z9

2,714

42

1513

4

213

5

8

345

13

2

2

21

7

172

\l

1

1

173

4-

1

67

21

2.369

Ig

156

2

192

2

1

920

13

94

1

119

65

20

1,44g

]6

62

1

73

.;;;

,..- _ _ _ _ ..A.. _ _ _ - ,

:\'a1e103

~

r!Jj

Females
(506)

2,34a

33

1

322

11

1!

171

9

3

151

2

4

5

2,021

22

5

5

707

7

6

1,314

15

7

2l

54

B. nI-Employers, Employees and Independent WQ,Tkers
!:lub·division 6.4 wholesale trade in foodstuffs

Sub-division 6.6

,...---------------------_.}.,._--------------------~

c5

z

TOTAL
Admini!!j;raiive Unit

~

OJ
iLl

(1\

Employers

Employees

r---- ----- - - - - - -

Independent
\Vorkers

I'oTAL

r - - - . - - ' - - - - - - - , r--.---"-----.., , - - _ _ ..A.. _ _ _ - - , :---_ _ _ _..A.. _ _ _ --, , - _ . ____ ..A-_ _ _ --,

Males

.Females

]Hales

Femal£-s

JYIales

Females

Males

Females

Males

Female.

(5(J7)

(508)

(509)

(tHO)

(511 )

(012)

(513)

(514)

(515 )

(616)

2

1

1

72

3

46

8

1

Bikaner District Total

73

6

2

Biksner District Rura.l

';"'3

3

1

72

3

21

6

3

Bikaner (North) S. D. R.

73

3

1

72

3

2()

6

4

Bikaner (South) 8. D. R.

1

5

Bikaner District Urban

3

6

Bikaner District U. r.. C.

3

7

Bikaner City

I

2

...

..

25

1

5

20

Sub-division 6·7 Insurance

,.---------------TOTAL

Administrative Unit

(I)

Sub· division 6.8

..A.. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ --,

Employees

Employers

r----------- __ -

Independent

TOTAL

Workers

r-----"--------: r - - _ _...A..---...-.... ,----_;._-.. ----... ,-.___

...A... _ _ _ ~

, -_ _ _ .--A. _ _ _ --,

Males

Femaleii

Males

Females

Male!!

Female.

Males

Female.

Males

Femalea

(531)

(632)

(633)

(634)

(535)

(636)

(537)

(638)

(539)

(MO)

1

Bikaner District Total

5~5

86

2

Bikaner District Rural

7

lSI

Bikaner (North) S. D. R.

I)

17

Bikaner (South) S. D. R.
"5 Bikaner
District Urban

2

2

688

6G

6

Bikaner District U. N. C.

164

22

7

Bikaner City

434

44

a

Sub-divi.ion 7.0 Transport &; Communications otherwise unclas!!ified
and incidental services

0
Z

Administrahve Unit

Sub-divi!!ion 7.1

r-------------------_,A._-------------------..,
Emplqyers

TOTAL
. -_ _ _ ...A.... _ _ _

~

,,--_ _ _ ....A. _ _ _

ElnployeoB

~

, -_ _ _ ...A--_ _ _---.

Independent

Workers_
,--_--..A..-_

~

r---------TOTAL

,--_ _ _ ..A _ _ _

~

Iii

.;a

Males

Fema.les

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Item.les

(555)

(556)

(557)

(558)

(559)

(560)

(061)

(562)

(563)

(564)

Bikaner District Total

919

54

2

Bikaner District Rural

65

f)

3

.

Bikaner (North) S. D. R.

49

f)

Bikaner (South) S. D. R .

6

5

Bikaoe District Urban

864

49

e

Bikaner District U. N. C .••

10.

3

1

Bikaner City

760

-i6

rn

(1)
1

.o.::lI

55

in Industries and Services by Divisions and Sub-divisions-(Contd.)
Sub-division 6·6 Real Estate

Wholesale trade in cclmmoLiities other
than
foodstuffs
__
__
_ ..A.. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _,

~--- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - " - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ---.,_~

Employers

Employees

Independ~nt

Employers

TOTAL

Employees

Workers
r-----"-----., ',-- _ . . A _ _ - . . . . , - _. __ ..A.. _ _..., , -_ _ _ ..A.. _ _ _ ..., , -_ _ _ ..A_ _ _ _ _--.,
Males Females
(517)

Males Females Males Females

(5IB)

(oW)

(5:J1)

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

(523)

(524)

(525)

(526)

(527)

(528)

r--~---'

Males
(041)

~-

-------"------..,

Males
1629}

Females

(i}21 )

(622)

46

6

1

21

6

:a

(530)

211

3

1

-i

25

5

5

6

20

7

-----.---~--------------~

Employee..

r----.,..,.._---~

Males

Division r Transport, Storage and CommunicationJ

Moneylending, banking and other finanf'ial husiness
Employers

o

Z

Independent
\\'orkers

Infiependent
Workers

r---------------------_.)..._----------------~

TOTAL

, - - - . A . - - h , - ___ ..A.. _ _ ~

Employers

, -_ _ _ ..A:_ _ _ --..,

Employees

r----Je.------. ,-___

Independent
\VorkerB

..A.. _ _ _ ........., , - - - -.......... - - _ - ,

0

Z

~

~

Females Males Females

Malus

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

(543)

(544)

(5~)

(546)

(547)

(548)

(549)

(050)

(561)

(1)62)

(553)

(654)

26

3

563

82

2,591

59

17

2,174

12

400

42

7

19

150

'I

6

112

?

3S

5

17

124

6

6

89

6

29

8

23

1

3

0{

5

2.062

5

388

42

£)

1

84

80

2

6

4

1,978

288

40

7

(542)

6

2

2

26

1

·6

26

3

556

63

2,441

52

6

10

!l

188

20

164

3

16

1

418

43

2,277

49

TTansporl by roa.d

11

11

5

1

.e

Sub-division 7.2 Transport by water

--.,
Independent
\Vorkers

Employers

Employees

~-~~

,-~--...,

~_-..A..-_~

Males Females ~Iales Females Males

.-------------------=-------------------.,
Employers

TOTAL
, -_ _ _ .A_ _ _ _ --.,

, - _ _ ___.._ _ _ - - ,

Emplf""lyees

Independent
W<Jrkers

,,-----"-----.,

,----__..._----.,

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Fettlaleli

(571}

(572)

(573)

(574)

(575)

( fl76)

(577)

(578)

10

....

~565)

(566)

(567)

(568)

(569)

(570)

17

5

513

7

389

42

6

17

5

32

6

14

5

29

3

3

4

3

1.1

n

5

496

1
4

357

42

24:

80

2

472

277

40

2

10

...

10

1
2

10

5

e
.... ,

7

56

B. m-Employers~ Employees and Independent Workers
Sub-divislOll '1.3 Tram;port

zo

by all'

8ub-dlYlsion 7.4

r-----.-------------"-.---------------------,
r--------TOTAL
TOTAL
Employers
Employees
Independent
. A.dministru"ivo unit

(1)

l----_A_---~

,.-----"----~

\Vorker"

r-----A....-----.. ,-- _-_./-...__--- . . . . ,-- _ _ _ ..A.. _ _ ---.,

!VI ales

Females

Males

Females

l\la.les

( (79)

{oSO}

(681)

(682)

(51::13)

(6tH)

(51'l5)

FenlaJes

Males

Females

(586)

(587)

(588)

1

Bikaner District Total

1,581

3

2

Bikaner District Rural

7'

2

3

Blkaner (:"forth) S. D. R.

157

1

of,

Bikaner 1Houth) S. D. R.

20

1

6

Bikaner District Urban

1,504

1

6

Bikaner District U. N. C.

7

Rikaner Cit:--

..

50
I

1.464

Sub·dhri8ion 7.7

Sub-division 7.6 Postal Sen'ices

Administrative Unit

r- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Employers
TOT..lL

-----"----

( 1)

Malee

Females

Males

( 6o."I)

(~CH:)

(8.,6)

-"--------- - - ---- - -----,
Employees
IndeJ1endellt
W0rke. II

',606)

_ _ _ _ _ _,A._~ -

,------'-- ---,

Females

Malee

Female.

Males

}<'emale.

(607)

(601:1)

(609)

(610)

(611 )

(412)

73

2

1

Bikaner District Total

7.

Bikaner District Rural

18

18

3

BikanE"r (North) S. D. R.

18

]8

•

Bikaner (South) S. D, R . . .

5

Bikaner Distnot Urban

55

&

Bikaner Di"triC1; U. N. C .••

10

7

Bikaner CiSY

45

55

2

r--- --"-------,

TOTAl,

Male.

2

2

--....

,-- _ _ _ ..A.-____ _

2

10
. 45

2

2

S-b-division 7.9 Wireless Sen'ices

zc

r------------------___
Employers

TOTAL

Administrative Unit
,------"-----,

(1)

,-- _ _ _ _ oA. _ _ - - - . ,

.A. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ --.,

Employees
, , - - - - _ - ' - _ _ _ --.,

Independent
Workers

r- - - - -'- ------..

r--------TOTAL

,-- _ _ _ ...A.. _ _ _ --.,

Males

.Ifemales

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Female.

Males

Females

(1)27)

(628)

(629)

(630)

(631)

(632)

(633)

(634.)

(&86)

(636)

'.711

lUI,

595

20

1

Bikaner District Total

2

Bikaner District Rural

3

.I;ikaner (North) S, D.

R.

478

11

~

Bikaner (~outh) S. D. R.

117

9

5

Bikaner District Urban

?,IUS

847

439

48-

6,677

79')

1

6

Bikaner District U. N. C.

7

Bikaner City

1

1

1

1

1

57

in Industries and Services by Divisions and Sub-divisions-( Oontd.)
Railway
..-

__

Employers

Employees

Independent
Workers

, -_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ .A- _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ -..,

TorAL

Employers

r----_A_--_--.

,----"----....

, - -_ _ _ J.._ _ _

Employees
~_,

,--- _ _ _ -A-_ _ _ _ -."

Independent
Workers

r- _____

_.A__~

-

-

--...

Males Femalf-l8

Malee

Females

Males

Females

Males

Female"

MaleEl

FAU1Qles

(E9t)

(fi95)

(596)

(597)

(1%18 )

(5U9)

(600)

(601)

(602)

Males Females

Males Females

( 5!{9)

(691)

(592)

(593)

1.580

3

1

"/7

2

( r,90)

war~housing

Sub-division 7.0 Storage and

transport

- .A. _ _ _ _ _ _ - - - . - . - - - - _ _ _ _ _ -..,

1
2

57

8

20

4
1

1,503

1

6
6

50

7

1

1

1,453

TeJegrapb Services

Sub-Division 7.8 Telephone Services

------------"-------------... r------.- _______
Emp!Qyers

, _ _ _ .:A... _ _ ~

Employees

r----A----~

1'tlales Females Males Females
(613)

(614)

(615)

(616)

Independent

~

________ JI.._ -

ElIlploYeI'g

TOTAL

~------

- - - - - - - - - ----._,

Employees

Independent
Workers

Workers

r---_.}.._---

r-----"~------...

r--~-_A_---~

,----

";::

.Malps Females

Males

Fenlales

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

(618)

(619)

(620)

(621)

(622)

(623)

(624)

(625)

(626)

(617)

--a
()!,

1

7

i)

8
<4

6

7

6

7

7

7

Health, Education and PuNic Admin;Itrat;an

Sub-division 8.1 Medical and other Health Service'S

----- ._- - _._- ........ _--- - - - - - - , r- - - - - - - . - - - - - - - - - - - -...... - - ----------------Employers
Employeee

___ ~

r----"---;--"t

Males Females

Males Females

(637)

(639)

~~_.A..

(638)

Indepenrient
Workers
, - - - - " - - ---,

TOTAL

Employef's

Employers

r----A..---~

r---- - ..A-._ -

---,

r-- -

_,_---~

-

Indepen'lent
Workers
_ _ _ _ ..A.- _ _ _ ._

....

~
di
·C
co

"00

Males

Females

1\1al e"

Fomales

(647)

(648)

(\H9)

(650)

216

679

199

44

17

1

1

2

1

2

Males Females

Malee

Females

MaleR

Females

(640)

(641)

(642)

(6<13)

(644)

(645)

(646)

7.6a6

849

56

18

723

689

19

6

1

2

472

11

6

117

2

8

2

8

1

7,086

830

60

17

721

a15

677

199

411

39

28

9

38

10

11

2

6,655

791

22

8

688

205

666

197

1

4

44

16

5

22

8

fD

22

i

7

1

58

B. m-Employers, Employees and Independent Workers
Sub-division ~.2 Education.al SerVIce" a.nd Research
r-_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _..A.._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _..--..
<$

Z

Employers

TOTAL

Administru.tlve Unit

--

-0::

r----_..._----....

CD

w

Males
~l}

r--------_., r - - - -

...A..

,--

Independent
\Vorkers

Elnployees

Sub-division 8.3

-----, r----...A..-----.

--------TOTAL

r-_ _ _ .A._ _ _ ,

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

MaJe,,;

Females

:Males

Female.

(t;0 I)

(662)

(653)

(654)

(655)

(650)

.6(7)

(658)

(6on)

(660)

1

1

Bikaner District Total

1,100

131

1,088

130

12

2

Bikaner District Rural

92

11

86

11

6

3

Bikaner (Notth) S.D. R.

46

7

89

7

6

4

Bikauer (South) S. D. H.

"

47

47

4

120

5

Bikaner District Urban

1,008

1.002

119

6

1

6

Bikaner District U. N.O.

128

21

122

20

6

1

7

Bikane)' City

880

~9

880

~9

8ub-division 8.5 ViJ1a.ge officers and Elervants. including village watchmen
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ .A._ _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ . ,

TOTAL

Employers

Employees

Independent
Workers

Administrative Unit

Sub-divi8ion 8.6
r--------TOTAL

, - - - - - ...... - - - - _ . , r-

(1)

MaJes

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Ma.les

Females

(675)

(676)

(677)

(678)

(679)

(680)

(681)

(682)

(683)

(684)

11

3

11

3

601.

452

3

2

a

3

1

Bikaner District Total

2

Bikaner Distriot Rural

2

S

Bikauer (North) S. D. R.

2

4,

Bikaner (South) S. D. R.

5

Bikaner District Urban

9

9

598

462

6

Bikaner District U. N. C.

9

9

61

15

7

Bikaner City

53'7

437

2

3

3

3

Sub-division 8.8 Employees of the Uni(Jn Governments
AdministratiYe Unit

r------------------...A..-------------------,
y--------_
Employers
Indppendenf;
Employee~

TOTAL

r---~-----~

(1)

Sub-division 8.9

.-___

,

...A..

Males

Females

Males

.Females

(699)

(700)

(701)

(702)

1

TOTAL

_ _ - A . . _ _ _ _ ..,

Male,

Malee

(703)

(704)

(705)

1,527

1

Blkaner DistrictTotal

1.527

2

Bikaner District Rural

142

142

3

Eikaner (North) S.D.R.

142

142

-4

Bikaner (South) S. D. R.

5

Bikaner District Urban

()

Bikaner District U. N. C .••

7

Blka.ner City ,.

,..
1

25
1.360

1,385

1

25
1

~---...;..--~-~

.l!emales

1

1,385

Workers

1,360

1

r----~...... - - - _ . ,

Females

Males

(706)

(707)

Females
(708)

59

in Industries and Services by Divisions and Sub-divisions-( Contd.)
Sub-division 8.4 Police (other thfm village watchmen)

Army. Navy and Air :Force
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ .A- _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - ,

Employers

Employees

.,.---.--"----....

,--~--"'- .. ~----..

Males Females

Males Females

(661)

(66 2 ;

Independent
Workers
r------'----,

(663)

,.--------------------'------------------------, ~
ToTAI,

Employers

Ernployees

Independent

Cil
Workers
r----...A....- --~ r----_".._---~ r - - - - . . A - - - - ---... ,_____ ..._.J,._ _ _ _ ......._ 'Ii:
~

il'Iales

Pernales

Males

Females

'\Iales

Females

Males

Females

:\1ale8

Females

(665)

(666)

(667)

(668)

( Bo9)

(670)

{on)

(67:l)

(673)

(674)

906

4

906

1

210

210

I

157

157

3

53

53

696

4
4

696

4

5

105

105

591

4

591

6
4

7

Snb-division 8.7 Employees of State Governments
Employees of Municipalities and Local Boards
- - - - - - c . . . , ,.-_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _..A... _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - . ,

o
:z;

_ - _ _ _ _ _ ..A... _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

Employers

Employees

Employers

TOTAL

Independent

Employees

Independent!i
Workers
'!D

Workers

r---J-.._- -__., ,.--___..__ ---, r----.A- ------., r - - - - _.J-.. __ ----., ,----.A..---c..., ,-- --- - ....."._---~ ~---_.,._---.._
Males Fema.les

Males Females

(685)

(687)

(688)

601

452

(6OO)

:'.lales Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

(689)

(691)

(692)

(693)

(694)

(696)

(696)

(697)

(698)

2,843

60

2,843

60

1

144

I)

144

5

a

127

4

127

4

3

17

1

17

1

•

(690)

3
8

598

452

2.699

55

2,699

65

61

10

78

2

7~

2

6

1>37

437

2,621

63

2,621

53

7

Division 9

Employees of Non-Indian Governments

-------......----------------,
Employees
Employers
Independent
, . -_ _ Jo..._ _ --.,

Males Females
(709)

(710)

7:!

----""-----...
Males l<'cruales

(711)

(712)

, -_ _ _..A.. _ _ _ - ,
r----.....J._---~

r- _ _ _ -A.. _ _ _ ---.....

Workers

,------...).._-----,

.0

Z

GiS
.;:::
a>
':n

Males Female!'!

Males

Females

Males

li'emales

Males

Females

Males

Feu.a\eH

(714)

(715)

(716)

(7l7)

(718)

(711:1)

(720)

(721)

(722)

9.541

1,820

10

1

5,308

921

4,223

898

1

176

511

61

492

115

2

787

118

428

46

359

7::.

3

216

58

83

15

133

43

4

8,538

1,644

4,797

860

3,731

'83

5

951

381

i3U

229

221

152

6

7,587

1,203

4,067

631

3,610

631

7

(713)

1.003

••

not elsewhere specified

..A---j:.~mplo y ee;----i:depende"n t -,

Employers

'j'OTAL

Workers
r---.A....--~

Service~

IS

...

10

10

1

1

60

B. m-Ew.ployers~ Employees and Independent Workers
Sub-division ~ro Services otherwise uncla""ified
,---

o

z

.

1w

.A. _ _ _ - - _ - - -

TOTAL

Administrative Unit

(1)

,.- _ _ _ ..A. _ _ _ ,

M"lles

Fem.ales

(723)

(724)

- -

Sub-diviFion !J.l

- _ -_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ --,

rendered by
r---------

Independent
Workers

r - _ _ _J - _ _- - . ,

Employers

Employe~'8

r------'-- --- ~

.,.--- __.A.._ - - - ,

Males

Females

Males

Fenlales

Male.,

}<'emales

(725)

(726)

(72. )

(728)

(729)

(730)

(731)

(732)

TOTAL

r-----~---

Males

Females

1

Bikaner District Total

3,088

668

550

213

2.538

455

3,946

903

2

Bikaner District Rural

652

103

302

35

350

68

205

26

3

Hikaner ()l orth) S. D. R.

51""

76

2:26

22

292

54

202

24

4

Bikaner (South) S. D. R.

134

27

76

18

58

14

3

2

6

Bikaner District Urban .

2,436

565

248

178

2,188

387

3.741

877

6

Bikaner District U. N_ C. _.

]1'4

117

81

23

117

645

216

7

Bikaner City

~,aa2

441;

167

2.165

2~0

3.096

661

178

8ub-division 9.4

Sub-division 9'3 Laundries and laundry services
, . - - - -_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - J . . . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

~

_ _ _ _ _ ___..
~--------

0
Z
C

r----..A..--------,

''C
cD
OCJ.

(I)

Males

Females

(747)

(748)

25

r-~.A..---.....,

Males

(749)

lndepeudent
WorkeI't;

Employees

Employers

TOTAL

Administrative Unit

r----....J.._---6--- , - - _ - _ J _____ -

Females

Males

Femaleil

(753)

(754)

(i55)

(756)

200

2fJ

34

•

198

26

84

8

8

2

16

1

]88

23

1~

5

lfemales

Males

Females

MalBs

(75()

(751)

(752)

1

Bikaner District Total

220

2

Bikaner District Rural

4

C

3

Bikaner (North) S. D. R,

4

4

4

Bikaner (South) S. D. R.

5

Bikaner District Urban

6

Bikaner District G. N. O ••.

7

Bikaner City

216

25

8

2

208

29

20

20

20

TOTAL
, - _ _ _ ..A.. _ _ _ _ --,

-+--~

Sub. division 9,7

Sub-di vision 9'6 Legal and business services
0

r - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ .A.._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - - _ _ _ _ _ _ - - - - - - , , - - - - - - - -

z

Iii

'i
en

Employers
r-----"-- ----., r - - - - ..A.. _ _ _ _ - ,
TOT4T,

Administrative Unit

(1)
1

Bikaner District Total

2

Bikaner District Rural

3

Bikaner (North) B. D. R_

•

Hikaner (South) S. D. R .

5

Bikaner District Urban

8

Bikaner District U. N. C.

7

Rikaner City

..

Employees
, -_ _ :.A.. _ _ _ _ - ,

TOTAL

Independent
Workers

,.-----"---........,

, . -_ _ J - _ _ _ --.,

Males

Females

Males

Fen,ales

Males

Fe n)s l.,,,

MaleK

I'Cluales

Males

Females

(771)

(772)

(773)

(774)

(77'5)

(771»

(777)

(778)

(779)

(780)

113

2

4

109

2

.3

113

2

4

109

2

23

11:"

2

4

109

2

23

81

Do.....'ie . ..,ioee (bu," no\ illcludiDC "I'.,i• •

8ub-diYiaiou. VJl Barbertl a.nd beau,",. .bops

_ _"en .of f __lly ho,..bolde to oae allot-her)

---------~-----------------------~
]ndependent
Employee.
-plo:r- II
,r--_...)o._ _ _ _ ,

r::-"----

Worker.

(733)

('184)

2

~ 735)

(736)

(737)

(738)

3,g17

885

27

218

Z05

26

202

1

~---~---~

r---.A.-----.,

Males )I'emale. Ma.lee Fe.alM Males Femalea

Ma1811

Female.

Jlales

(739)

(740)

(74,1)

(740\

(1")

•

23

S

S

2

20

20

4

••712

659

27

118

"68

26

2

101

"81

IS

Ii

628

210

17

1

8\-1

2l

2

H

87

10

IS

8,084

444

10

217

3U

2

2

7

Sub-div iRian g·o l~r('r('atioll ,wrVlc,',.

r - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -_,'----~-.- -_ ----~-- ---.-----~

Independent
Workers

Employers

TOTAL

lVlales Females

Males Females

.Males

Femalf's

Males

Females

(766)

(767 )

(768)

(769)

(770)

122

2:

380

111

1

86

28

!

31

11

S

66

17

274

88

•"

(764,)

(765)

6

1

10

"

18

1

'84

113

2

90

28

31

11

69

17

18

6

4

"

1

384

86

1

38

6

366

79

9

.A.._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _.,

Etnployeea
.A.._~

Independent
Workers

~

_ _ .A.._~

Mal. Ii ]PernaJ.. Males Females Males Fernalea
(783)

..

4

2:

118

2

34

4

114

2

6

7

240

2

Sub-di .... i.ion g·S Religious, Charitable and Welfare Services

Arts, letters and journali.m

r-_ _

4

Males

Female.

Females

(763)

4:

,..------_)~- -----, , . . - - - - - - ' - - - - - ,

Males

(7 6 2)

1.

Independent
'Yorker!'!

Emplr,yees

r-----'----~

(761)

(782)

(144 )

(743)

23

(760)

(781)

Females

24

(759)

r---~--_"

Males

4.3

{758}

Employers

Females

43

(757)

1

~---~---~

1

Employees

1

Worlren
...--_ _
_ J- _ _ _ ---."

2

r----.JC-----. ,-----...A---........ r---.A..---, r----..A.-~--.

6

Independent

Employee!!

504

-~-------------------__...

:Malee Females

(742)

5N

Hotels, rCHauran ts and e'Lting ho.oRes
Employers

""'-

Employers

(784)

(785)

21
.0

(786)

-

r--

___ -

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ .A..-_ _ _ _ _

Employers

TOTAL

--------------~

Employees

,..-_ _ _ .A. _ _ _ ......_

,..-_ _ _.A. _ _ _ ......_ ,..-_ _ _ .A.. _ _ _......_

Male.

Femalea

Malea

Females

Males

Females

cum

(788)

(789)

(700)

(791)

(792)

1.127

77

883

3

it

18

9

7

......

12

68
15
48

..

••

...
...

...
..
...

883
9
674

lndependeot
Workera

r----~---

........

Males

Femalea

(79B)

(79ol )

'7"

1

18

B

7

:.

12

4

...

56

:.

16

3

40

•

3

7

6~

B. III-Employers, Emp~o~~~ {U!C! ~1:1~~g~i. WQr1:f;~ ~: ~'\\¥I~ ~ I~~~·'g
Divisions and Sub-divisions-{ Oonoid.)
EcollomicallJ7 i~active persons

(ii) Persons living principally

on pe]lSiODS, remitt.ancea.
scholarships
and
funds
r-_
____
_
____

Persons

Males

Females

JHales

Females

Males

Females

(795)

(796)

(797)

(798)

(799)

(800)

(80:!)

Bikaner District Total

871

769

102

l~

2

Bikauer District Rural

131

97

34

10

3

Bikaner (Nortl.)

10

(1)

1

S. D.

l~.

97

82

15

15

19

672

68

4

Bikaner (South) S. D. Jt~

3,!

5

Bikaner District Urban

740

6

Bikaner District U.N.C.

7

B;kaner

City ••

57

40

17

683

632

51

...

~

,-----------"-------------..

(i) Persons living principally on income from nonproperty
r- _agricultura.l
_- _ _ _-4.- _
_ _ _ _ --,

~

TOT A L

i

Adlnwistrati va Unit

-

-j

,-----------------------__;..__-----------,---------

2

110

2
1

no

1

ECOllomically inactive persons
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ..A. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ -

Adlninistrativp Unit

(iii) Inmates of .Tails. asylums,
alms hOl1ses, and recipients

~

___-

and vagrants

of doles

principally on income derived
from non-productive actiVities

~------~--------~

Males

Females

Males

Females

?Ialelii

(802)

(803)

(804)

(805)

(806)

(807)

.l\'61ua]e:-;

1

Bikaner District Total

588

61

61

39

2

Bikauer District Rural

85

33

2

1

8

Bikaner (North) S. D. R.

70

14

2

1

Bik~ner

15

19

(South)

S.D.R.

5

Bikaner District Urba.n

503

28

59

38

6

Bikaner District U.N.C.

36

12

4

4

:;'

Bikaner City

4~7

1(,

55

34

..

.......

(v) All other persons living
(iv) Beggars

~------~------~ ~------~--------,

(l)

___

a3!
_C.-:;:;-BOUSEHOLD AND AGE (SAMPLE) TABLES
EX1Jta,natoru Note:_;_-Tliis series consists of the following tables:-

I Rousel;l.9\q. (sjze ~ny. compositiqo.).
It Livelihood Classes by Age Groups.
C. IU Age and Civil Conditions
C.
IV Age and Literacy.
C.
V Single Year Age Returns.
All these tables have been prepared on satfi,ple basis. In Table C. I nearly 1 in 1000
households has been seleoted a,~ ~alllple from the National Register of Oitizens.
In other
tables lO(:~ sanlple has been ·taken frOln the ellHllleration f:>lips PGl~taining to general population
exclud.ing displaced persons populat..iou.
C.
U.

C. I.-Household (size and composition)
~"o T' E~--Thi>l t.ab1e .'lh')\v'l f.ll· (',l,'Ll ",_,n'nh i ,'."'0 t.he 10tal :llllnbel' 'af hou,eholds, household population, tho sau\ple
household,,; popUlation, ,uHI the ;liz,:; and COlUpOSltlOn of hou"eholds ill the sample household population.
The figure'> are arranged undf'I' two broad groups:-( i) Hize of households.
(ii) Compoeation of hom;ehold,,<.
in (i) Households have been ralled:(a) "~mall" if the number of inmates IS 3 or less.
(b) "1IIedium" if the number of inmates is between 4 and 6.
(c) "Large" if the number of inmate., 1S between 7 and 9.
(d) "Very large" If the number of Inmates js 10 or more.
in (ii) the inluates in a household are descrJbed under three heads:(a) Helationship to the head of t.he household.
(h) Number in hroad age groups.
(cl Civil condition.

l!1XPLAN ATO R Y

S.

Administrative Unit

No.
1
2
3
4
5
(')

7

Tots 1 '\0. of
household

(1 )

(2)

Bikaner District Total
Bikaner District Rural

65.857
34,301
17,470
16,831
31,556
5,466
26,OVO

Bikaner (North) S. D. R.
Bikaner (Sout.h) S. D. R.

Bikaner District Urban

:U~kaner

Distrid U. N. 0.
Bikaner Cit~,

household
population
_Total
___
_ _ _ ..A- _
_ _ _ _ _ -;- _ _ --.,

, -_ _ -

Persons

Mares

(~)

(~)

330,245
181,257
110,221
fJ},036
148,988

Females

171,223
95,119
47,560
47,559
76,104
15,563
60,536

31,875
11 7,11R

Total No. of sample housebpld,s

(5)

(6)

159,022
86,138
42,d61
43,477
72,884

60
36
8
28
24

16,307
56,577

5
19

of_households
,r- _ _• ___ - -8izs
___
_ _ _ _ _ _ -"- _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
S.

~alnple of household

SFll,:!.l1

population

(3 Membel's

Adminilltratlve U"it

r------"-"------~

( 1)

1
2

Bikaner District Total
Bikaner DtStrict Rural

:3

Bikaner (N ()['th) S. D. I to

.J,

Bikaner (~unth) S. D. P..

5

Bikaner District Urban

{)

Blkaner District U . .'>.I. C.
Hikaner ('ity

7

Large

Vpry large

(7-9 Meml>prB)

(10 Members

rlln1es Fe,vla'p<-;

r - - - _ _ . A . . - - -__"'
No.
PerS<;lD5
(16)
(I])

(I)

(b)

(',~)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(H)

(15)

303
181
32
14q

146
89
15

1.8
10

39

26
18

131

14

2

23

8

";

110
59

1

11

1
>}

1
21

11

39l
58

7

122
28

57
15

157
92
17
75
65

8
1
7

17
3
14

8
2

42
11
31

59
51
14

1

12

1

12

7~

13

1.2

94

52

22

I

tl

'7
2
5

1

37

_.,- __ -

;S.

----- -----

..J~

Administrative Unit
Hpads of household!!
ond their wi'l.'es

,---------'".-..__
(1)

1

Bikaner District Tohl

2

Bikaner District Rural

.3
4

Bikaner (North) S. D. R.
BiJisner (Ruut.h) ~. D. f~.

5
6
7

Son>' of heads
of households

-----~

(Hi)

(20)

{2 I)

(22)

(23)

51
30

69
45

58

24
12

8

48
29

I

~4

~3

;~9

21
4

21

24

2S)
25

-4

t1

(j

17

17

IS

HJ

____

No.

(1)

1
2

~

4

5

~
~

Bikaner District Total
Bikaner District Rural

Bikaner (~orth)~. D. 1:.
Dikaoor (South) t-;. D. H.

Bikaner District Urban
Bikaner District U. N. C.
Bikaner City

Other female
relations of
heads of
households

53
32

Bikaner District Urban

Unit

Other male
relations of
hC'litds of
households

Femal('s

Bikaner 1 ,i,triet L'. :->. '0.
Bjkanel' l,ity

Ad1l1ini,~trati"O

Daughters of
heads of
hous<"bolds

:\lale8
IJfl)

~

33
4

i;

------------------------- ~

i'l.

11

Sample households
------"----------------- housC'holrls
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _Composition
_ _ _ _ _ _ of _
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _- -

--~--------~--- .

~o.

'

or above)'

or less)
r----"- -----, ,-----"----,.....,. , - _ _ .A.._ ----.
:-io. Persons
No. Persons
No. Pereons

~o.

l">ereons

Medium
(4-6 Memb~rs)

~

Sa1uplo
,- ____________________
_ _ _ _househ.olds
_..o._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

1

{;

11

:!3

12

19

5'
7

_

3

It)

RaUlple households

------,

_).._

Composition of households

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _.A.._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

lnfants, non·adults and adults in hOl1sehold"
'
CIvil conditions
-------,
r - - - - - ---,-------"----.------------..,..A..
,
..,
Tr,fant-: (nl!p less Non-adults (age Adults (age 21
Unmarried
:\Ialried
\\'iJowed or
than, DR year,1
l-:?O year13)
years and over)
Divorced
,-~---"------., r----"-----.,
,----"-------, ,----'--~ ,----'------, ,--_-A..,__..."
:\Jalt's Females Males Females Males Females Males Females Males Fem'a1es :\Iales Female'"
(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

(::l9)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(33)

6
4

7
';'

67

82
49

73
43

68
36

70
44

60
37

76
45

91
55

1
:--::

7'

424
RS

10
39

10
33

7
2H

5
39

H
31

10
35

11
44

25
63

33
67

30
5

32
7

23
5

::.7

:;;)

25

26
9
17

31
6
25

42
8
1.f

2
2

18

(34)

(35)

c. II-Livelihood Claases
JlJripl"".,."" N.t.:-Thilltabl••hows for..ala ,rae' in this Diltri.' tbe .ampl. population arranged,
LIVELIHOOD

r-------------------- - - - - - - -----------"fl,.;cu/tur.1 Ol.sse,

--------------------------'------------I.-Culti ...atOZ'll of land
wholly or mainly owned
and t,heir depend_n t.

.Age Gr:ouptl

Sample Population

.~

-------_;.._------~
Males
Females
Penon.
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

1I.-Cultivator. of land
wholly or mainly unowned
and their dependants

_ _ _ _ _ _ ...A.--_ _ ----,., , , - - _ _ _ _j._ _ _ _ _ _

Males
(G)

Females
(6)

Males

(7)

Felllalell

is)

~

nI.-Cultli... at.ing
labourers •• d their
deptlftdan"
r- - _ _

.A--_-.._

Males

Fe. . Blell,
(10)-

(9)

BIE&lfBR
TOWll
0
1-- 40
5-14
15-24
20--34

35-4(

46-64
55-64
65-74
'if> and oyer
Age not stated

..

81,200

17.070

14,180

5.320

4,443

3,844

2,931

34

708
3,834
8.385
5,760
4.202
2,935
2.827
1,478
895
681

380
1,716
4,446
2.824
2,236
1,877
1.631

323
1.618
3.939
2,936
1.006
1.058
1,196

64
575
1,70R
730
655
341

62
360
1,49z
933
835

38

36
3tlb

1

511

872
602
486

606

203
195

~Z5

392

905
496
472
478
396

611
32]
:214
245

l~O

ll~

165

78

216

46
98

126
43

144

335

113

88~

33'·

(;

4

12
7
5

5
10
3
3

2
2

ti

2

~~

BIKA)IlRR

Tctal
0

1- 4
5-14
15-24
25-34,
36-44
45-04
65-6~

65-74
75 and over
Age not stated

16,275

8.842

7,433

5,083

4,204

3,071

2,630

188

) Of)

:14-

1 \1

843
2,6'15
1.191
1,175

62
5.52
1.636
668
625
312

57

1,557
5,064
2,731
2,328
1,169
1,585
671
551
53]

1->3
714
2,419
1,540
1,153
337
649
100
1M
145

:~:W

:1a~

879

210
849
394

t)OH

4'10

88

464
383
149

832
936

372
357
386

1,43::

501
180

374
95

214
333

1)7

44

..
4
4
5
3

816

.sufi

117

281
16]
229
68
138

41

31

11

18

1

-

4

2
2

2

BIKANEB. (tlORTB)

Total
0

1- «

5-14

8,627

...

10-24
25--34
35-44
45-54
55-tH
65-74
75 and
Age notstated

owr

176
829
2,692
1,IP1

933
51t;
1, 172
319
319
378

4,657
96
426

1,408
623

6Ill
306
665
162
209
243

3,870

2,961

2.448

1,929

1,058

80
403
1,284

62
::.'60
921
387

67
266
82]
393

25
104

1n
100
344

326

320

174
.22

74
312

82
121'1

82
28

199

96

568
414
212
507
157
110
135

374
J55
11:'1
87
2W
51

64
40

8-

S

lln

3

68
87
166
51
74

2

..

2

..1

2

~

30

BIKAKBR (SOV'rH)
Tolal

7,748

4,185

0
1- 4
6-14
15-24
26-84
35-44
45-1>4
5&-64
65-74

12
728
2,372
1,640
],395
651
413

252

9
417
1,237
568
656
526
271
210

232
153

143

76 and over
Age no~ .tated

148

8,563
3
311
1,185

972

739
125
142
42
et
10

2.122

1,756

1.842

292
715
28l

54
611
481i

200

4811

1015
47_
239
327

1,572

10

6;

23:?
472

2
4

1

436
213

1

9

138
79

98
86
]34

]4
ti2

367

167

13

~8

16

153
1

1

74
63
17
fH

1

~

..
I

2
2
I

65
by Age Groups
.aocording to age groups and dis*rihuted n the eight livelihood classes.
CLASSES
--------------"'---------------------------------r--------~

NOH·agricultural Clas<c_,

-----------,
I V.-Non-cul .. ; '-ating
owners of land; agrif>ul.
tural rent receivers anr!
their dependant"
. -_ _ _ _ .A.. _ _ _ _ ,

(II)

(I:!)

e:------.--------------~-A.----------- ---~---~-

Persons (including theirdppendants) who derive their
principal means of livelihood from

-----

r-------------------_,l._-------------,.---------,
V.-Production othf'r
thaD eultivatinn

VI.-Commerf>e

VlJ .-TranApor t

Age (,rOtor"

YIn .-Other servicps
nnd rniscellHnpou8
~j.(_)ur('t·s

y - - - - -----"------~

r-------'- ----~ .,- _ _ _ J... _ _ _ _

~

-

-_ -

_"..__----~

1\1 ales

FemaleI'!

l\1",les

Females

]\'[ale,

Females

( 13\

(14 )

( 15)

(]I> )

(17)

(HI)

(HJ)

(:.'0)

(I)

1,886

1,979

623

500

4,336

2,957

Total

62

15;-J
:!H4

47

DISTRICT TOTAL

104

62

1,423

1,225

1
5

6

23
23

]8
12

116

40
]99

11

3iO
328

:.!70
:202

3~n

]1

:.!55

::!Brl

8
4
11
12
6

184

5

158
84

')

108
101
45

215
152
80

19
8

107

21.
514

1-1

1:2

11)ll

20

o

10(;

",.,
82

Sl :;

iSH

1-4
5-14

131
12:-;

1::11
t-J4

7th
44H

til :!
242

15-21.
25-34

92
59

in

f)R·-~

:~4!'

1 :~5

41

~:!' :

269

31) -44
4& -5J

(1-1

32

2(l

3311

ISH

253
53

1,5- 74

';'1

;3f)

401
36f>
28(;
191;

.,~

4~

40

11

8

15

15

'-'
,>

110

115

126

18

15

4
II

4-

u.:fJ

3;) f)

55- 64
7;")

IU td

over

A ge nut stated

DISTRIC'F RURAL
81
5
18

14
9

49

14
12

,

H

7
2

5

8

2

]~

6

I

2

10

14

~8

30

21

20
14

3
10
]3
3
I

11

78

53

]7

7

23
25
16
]5

349

288

1

,-,

14
25
:H
:!7

IH

11
6

n

4

.>

...,

4

fl4

43
]5

4-

fi6

1

23
~]

5

Total

o

1--4
5-- 11

15-24
25-34
35-44
45-54
55-64
65-74
75 and over
AgR not staten

]
]

5

t;
S

13

279

214

4

.>

.-,

o

2

43
iO

11l

1 - 4-

4
4

3

4H
4f)

26

2

I

;-n
1(.
14

:'\9

~

USH-DIVISIOtl RURAL
35

12

10
4
4
2
]

9

\')

:5

22

15

5

15
11
2
6

9

I
~

I

3

10

67

9
5
3
3

8
2

,

10
9

10
8
4
2
2

11

1

4

]

J

56

11
17
11

10
4
7
4
1

1

79
6

17

17
6

1

Total

5-]4
15-24
~5-34

35-44
45-5455-64

65-74
75 and over
Age not. stated

1

1

2

7

59

59

2

70

74

Total

4

;-;

3

] -4

13
11)

7
1-1

15

Ix

14

17

SUB·DIVISION RURAL

46

37

29

4
8
10

3

1
5
6
6

11
5

I

6

4

57
2

5
15
1
f)

I]

i
6
3
4

:t

3
1

4
5
2

1

1

2

4,

4

15

6
7
?
4
2

8

17
(1

2
1
2
4

o

1

1
2

1

5-14
15-24
25-34
35-44
45-54

11

n

"

Hi
4

55-64

3

1

75 and over
Age net stated

11

Ii

65-74

66

c. n-LiveUb_ood Cla$,ses
L I

YELIHOO 0

r--.-----------------------r-----------Agric.ltural ClaJJelJ

~--------------~---~---~----

Age Group"

I. -Oultivators of land
wholly or mamIy owned
and their dependants

San.ple Population
r--------"---------..
Males
Females
Persons

(2)

,i)

(3)

(4)

, - -_ _ _..A.. _ _ _ _ -.,

II.-Oultivators of land
wholly or mainly
unowned and their
dependants

,--------'-

III. -Cultivating
labourers and their
dependants
, -_ _ _J . - _ ' - ' \

Malps

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

(f5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

( 9)

(10)

BIKANER
Total

14,925

8,228

6,697

0
1- 4
5-14
15-24
:!5-34

515

275
873
],801
1,633
1,061
1,045
695
500

240

],777
3,321
3,029
1,874
1,766
],242
907
344
150

35-44
45-54

55-64
65 -74
75 and over
Age not stated

245
100

904
],520
1.396
813
721
547
407
gg
50

237
2
23
67
62
30

29
10

10
2
2

22

239

2'3

5
31
60

4,

17

1

15

56

36
66

3
3

102

1
8

56

32
24
13
16

2

40

2

6
3

53

1

16
10

~

9
2

1

54
26
25

18
17
2
1

301

6

16

2

:::

BIKANER
Total

8,304

1,606

1,698

190

0
1- 4
5-14

92
478
803
781

33
160
443

59
318

17

27

62
53
22
24
8
10
2
1

41
41
22
25
15

15-24

368

25-34

329

35-44
45-54
55-64

65-74

75 and over
Age not etated

468

360
313

]68

200

157
82

172
]12

60

101

28
7

52
11

1

194

186

5

4
7
36
84
16
Hi

215

8

8

1

2
2
2

6

18
49
42
32
40
13

1

1
1

...

194
]61
80
]8

1l,{i21

6,622

4,99'

47

45

87

86

18

423

242
713
] ,358
],165
893
888
613.
440
217
!#3

181

1
6

4

8

11
18

1

10

19

9

13

8

4

20
18
]6

7

]3

8

2

3

6

1

1

1

16

,..
1

BIKANER
Total
0

1- 4
5-14

15-24
25-34
36-401
4J;-64

55-64

65-74

76 and over
Age not .ta.ted

...

1,~99

2,618
2,248
1,506
1,<f37
1,048

746
264
13~

586

],160
],083
613
549
435
306
47
::l9

5
2
1

3
2

9
6
3
6

1

17
14
8
)3

3
2

14

I

1
1

2
1
4
1
1
4

2

1

7

67

by Age Groups-( Ooncld.)
E_S_ _ .A.. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ S_
S_
_C
_L
_A
__

--------------"
IV. -~oll.-cll.ltivating
owners of land; agricultural rent receivers
an. d their dependants

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _-

_ _ _ _ _ _ -..

Non-ag,.icultural ClaslJe&
r-------------------"----------------------~

Persons (including their dependanLs) who derive their
principal means
of_
livelihood
frqm
- - J . -_
_____
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ -..

;-----

V.-Product-ion other
than cultivation

VI.-Commerce

VII.-Transport

VIII.-Other services
and miscellaneous
sources

,------"-----,

, - -_ _ _ _A_ _ _ _ - . .

,----"--------,

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17}

(18)

(19)

(20)

1,316

1,115

1.771

1,853

605

485

3.987

».689
11
316
695
569
2'27

32

11
50
76
128
84
69
41
20

165
476
729

4
15

,-------"-----,

,-----"-

----

J\ge

(ir'l'lps

{I)

DISTRICT URBAN
23

13

30
106

1
6

3
4

342

307
239
155

9
2

4

1
2

74

2

40
16
7

3

38

3
9

58
206
491
306
249
200
141
74
38
8

152
280
376
341
259
183
126
89
37
10

204

537

632

15
75

148

185

240
242

170
97
94
37

14

46
103
127
118
88
58

718

~

389
548
397
323
176
66

246
232
47
27

30

24

409

413

8
4U

6

1
4

108
125
45

17
(:l7
116
65
30
25

4

293

To$N

0
1-4
5-H
10-24,
25-34
35-4445-54
55-64
65-74
75 and ov.r
-~Il:e not .tated

DISTRICT URBAN NON-CITY
3

8

248
5

6

1

~1

55
39
35

2

;)0

3

99
25
::1

3
2

H
I

4

2:-;

16
15
7
3

1

25

18t

107

8-t

119

19

9

63
44
29
17
3

3

""

59
55
~5

15
]2
:3

77

(j

2

1

89
21
15
7
1

2:~

41

23
I>

Total
0

J- 4

5-14
15-24
25-:i4
35-44
45 -54

55-64
65-·74
75 and over
AgoR not sta ted

-CITY

10

5

1
5
6
2
1
:2

3

2
2

1

1,068

911

1,234

1,221

575

25
85
286
2U8
214
134
65
33
]2

32
130
201
207

43
131
307
222

127
132
269
222

142

!f0

::.S<::

81
79
30

145
106
59

120
82
60

:26

20

6

9

6

7

461

3,578

2,256

14

11

46

49
72
119

157
435
621

249
579

97
108

llB
85

J;6

32

•

...

Hi

Total
0

1 - 45-14

59:!

504

15-24

78

344

66
41
20

509

197
268

25-34
35 --4445-54
65-64
65-74

3

!l

376

:223

308

191
24
21

189
85

76 and over
Age not stat<>d

68

C. In-Age and
Expla,,".rF N "te;-'.rhia contain. the infonnation with regard to age and civil oonditions of the general population (excludiJl~
SAMPLE POPULA.TION

~'------------------------------------------~-------------

TOTAL

Adluinistrative Unit

Unma=ied

r-------------~.------------_,
Males
Females
Persons

(1)

~

r-

Widowed
or
Divorced

Married

.~-------,

.,.....------...;...--------, r-------..)...-------,

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

1

Bikanel District Total

31.200

17.070

14.130

7,720

5.923

8.177

6,795

1.178

1,412

2

Bikaner District Rural

16.275

8,842

7,433

3,813

3,424

4,682

3,664

347

345

3

Bikuner (Xorth) 1->. D. R.

8,527

4.657

3,870

2,]75

1,967

] .t'71

207

23::!

Blkaner (South) S

7,748

4,185

3,563

1,638

]'457

2,407

140

113

14,925

8,228

6,697

3,907

2,499

8.495

3,131

826

1,067

D. R.

5

Blkaner District Urban

t:i

Bikaner District U. N. C.

3,304

l/i06

1,698

825

682

681

720

90

296

7

Bikaner City

11.621

6,i)22

4,999

3,082

] .817

:!,804

2.4] 1

7S6

771

AGE 15-24

r-----------

.A._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ~_ ~~ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - - ,

"Viduwed
TOTAJ~

.·\dmini.trativ<' Uni$

r--_..A,
:Males
Females-

(I)

Unmarried

~!I\rrlf'd

r------..A_---~

r----....,A...___--- ~
Males
Fema!es

Fomales

Males

TOTAL

<::r
UiVOT('cd
r~~--J"_--_~

_ _ ..A- _ _ _ ~

(

l\fnl,'s

"Females

Males

Females

(~3)

(24)

(23)

(26)

(27 )

(21))

(29)

(30)

(3I)

(3:!)

1

Blkaner District Total

2,824

2,936

1,268

573

1,451

2,2'78

105

85

2,236

1.966

2

Bikaner District Rural

1.191

1,540

570

461

604

1.()(l1

17

18

1,175

1,153

451

410

158

140

1-1

lS

51H

414

4

Bikaner (~ nth) S. D. R.

5

Bikaner District Urban

6

Blkaner District U. X. C.

7

B'><lclllel' City

568

972

119

.'11

44(;

9:!1

3

eM

739

1,633

1,396

698

112

847

1,217

88

1,061

813

468

313

174

1::

17

16s

:cOO

1,165

1,083

524

100

50

R\l3

50

AGE 45--54r - - - - - - - - - - - - - ______
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _• _ _ _ _
.J~

r - - _...A- _ _ _ --,_

1\1:ale8

(l)

Female"

r - - - - , . ' .... - - - . . . .

".-~--~--'----....

]\131,,1' J"emnle.s

Males F'clllales

(.J])

(;'i:.!)

(1)3)

(54.)

(55)

52

1,353

882

226

314

872

606

8

894

609

34

40

372

199

.C)

639

481

ZR

1{\Z

157

5

255

128

11

1.196

2

Bikauer District Rural

936

649

065

.,

507

271

5

Bikaner District Urban

695

547

fl

Hjkttner Di"trict U. :;:..;. c.

82

]]2

7

Bik"JI('r Cit _'

613

435

(,,0)

(!"'C)

(40)

1,631

44

41

42

213

192

274

500

7'}.

56

';

5f.

flO

]01

387

:!17

185

:218

4.40

306

(lYER

1>1arried

1._T111n~ITI'_'(~

~----_,\_-------,

2]0

459

TOTAL

.o\dmini4rfltivp Unit

14

407

."roy 7i, AND

(1)

, . _ _ .A _ _ _

l\fRlp,,", F"rnakR

(48)

Bi){ aoer District Total

Blkaner (:->oHt.1J) ~tlb-[)iviRion l~ural

J.._ _ _ -

l\faIC'f; Felnalc,.;

(47)

1

4

r---.~-

r------TOTAL

l.'nmarricd

TOT·\T,

-- - _ -

':Viuo ..~od
OT
LivlllC£'d

r------_A__~-----,

i\ r fi lp,>

F0Hl1:J,.1n:...::

(71)

(7:.!)

(73)

l'T a 1(';.;

,-----~-

---

}"emnh>R

FelTIIl]C'''

1>-la1.,,,

(74)

(7:')

(76)

1

Bikaner District Tota!

486

195

5

353

84

2

Bikaner District Rural ..

386

145

1

332

80

:3

Bikan<'T (~"rth) Suh-Division

204

79

4

Blkaner (South) Sub-Division HUTa1

143

10

1

128

5

Eikaner District Urban •.

100

50

4

21

6

Hikaner Distric,t U. N. c.

7

11

7

Bi kfl ner Cit.y

135

ltU'!:"fll

~m

4

69

Civil Condition
displa.ced pe["sons} on the basis of sample slips.

The figures for the divorced and widowed persons ltave been show n together.

AGE 1-4

AGE 0

c:=----"------.

AGE 5-14

r----~----_;

- " - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ---------..,

To'.rAL

TOTAL
r-----JL--------~

,--

,\Vhlowed

Unmarried

TOTAL

'~-------. r-------~-----_,

l\Iarried

,-------_".._--~--:.

a;

or

Divorced

.~

r1l

r - - - - - " - - - - - - - - - , , -__ . __ . ..A- _ _ _ _ ---,

Males

Females

l\lalos

Females

l\1a.les

Females

Males

Fem>tlefl

l\'IaleR

F"Ill.t!,-·S

(ll )

(L2)

(13)

(U)

(15)

( 16)

(17)

( 18)

(1 \)

( :71))

380

323

1,716

1,618

4.446

3,939

3,785

3,361

659

573

105

83

843

714

2,645

2,419

2,106

2,145

539

274

2

96

80

426

403

1408

1,:284

1,169

1; 56

::39

2~8

3

I}

3

417

:H1

1,135

937

1,USCI

<it)

4

275

240

873

904

1,801

1,520

33

59

160

31S

443

3tiD

()

242

lSi

713

5St>

1,358

1,160

IH

/iOl!l

Unluarriod

r--------'.._- -~
IV[a10s FCln.tl",

Males

li"'lnf1.les

(33)

P4)

(:1 .• )

233

37

l,SSl

150

11

( III

1,'787

73

14.2

1,877

1,058

128

337

'",

832

485

1187

19

18

306

1::5

49(\

25

2

29

122

1,045

2

29

157

27

93

888

5

155

122

::n

714

Mal",!

665

499

(57)

_ _ A. _ _ _ - ,

/_____A__-,

1\1aleq Female ..

1\1a1e3 Female."

(58)

(5g)

(61)

(61)

(62)

74

9

625

260

173

337

12

8

315
122

1

133

45

110

29

193

62

1

721

2

121

703

117

61

r----~-.....A------l

l'Ilu.ll's

Fomales

(63)

(64)

002

556

68

357

191

201)

110

J6

Ifl

143

"

--

----

l\ra:-(h~

----

Fr:!Jllaie:--""..

233

Vemales

2\inll'R

(46)

( leI)

806

276

281

55

1.

54
4-l-

114

27

10

4

525

221

196

5

109

5

63

tS

416

216

138

7

-..,
Widowed
or
Divorced

r----_.)..._--~

r-----"----.,

l\]<-tleq,

J\TaleA Females

Vr-'llrl>llJ:lt'-l,

(07)

(tiS)

(G!\)

(70)

3"3'1

125

190

168

1

99

90

2

55

31

3

44

59

4

91

78

5

40

6

31:)

7

104

Jf)

128

279

245

99

45

24

H

77

28

265

103

11-1

202

217

------------,

..

i---- -...).._--------._

------."

:'PHHllt'H

AGE G;-->-71-

127

1

6

f)l_"

----------'

310

1

_._J

4

'Vidowed
or
Divorced

1\farrierl

Females

4

~

___________

),' ar:."d

( Lrj

AOE 55-64

t-.---- '----------,

5

1

167

---------- --- _'----------------,
l"'olHn.rl"L0 1 1

5

\V,,]owed

~In{( -

( 40)

20

_

(--

(3\1)

44

11

2

illYOrCe, l

(38)

1,1~2

899

1

5

2

2

~Inraurl'ip(~

(37)

981

26

(22)

299

, - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ _ _ _ _.A.....___

\Vidowe,l
or
'rUT AL
l'),,:orced
, - _ _ ~ __ _ A _ - - - - _ , r - - -- ----"- - -- - - - "
]\!:l]cq
FClnnles
1\Ialcc" Fenl«!'"

15

133

Females

.-\ .1<: ;;G--ll

Married

, - - - - - j - -"-----.

120

25-34

-~--"------ _ _ • - - - ----_------~

----- -

1216

AIal""

136

21

52

17

12

4-7

llU

9

18

82

A(~r: NOT "'TATI' n

, - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -__ ..A _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - - . . ,

Widowed

or

Unmarried

Married

r-----~_,

, . -_ _ ___J,__~

. , -_ _ _ J- _ _ _ --..

l\'fales

Females

Males

FemaleI'<

l\fal~s

(80)

(SI)

(82)

TOTAr.

Divorced

\\ i(lowed
or
I Jivorce,d

,...--_ _.A._

6

Z

__,

r---

-"-----,

Males

Females

(77)

(78)

128

111

1

53

65

2

39

56

3

14

9

4

75

46

I)

3

10

12

36

(79)

Females
(S4)

l\fnles
(S5)

Females
(86)

.-"
7

70

c. IV-Age
MIt;l."ator,. Notl:-This table shows the literaey by &ge group!! of the .ample population.

The figures of illiteratell inelude thOlle 01
one who can both read and write a simple letter in any soript. As the figures in Col. Nos. S '" 6 have been taken
TOTAL POPULATION

SAK:l'LI!:

r-:-----------------A..------------------------. . , - - - - - - -

Ad niniS"trative Unit;

'r--~

TOTAL
_____
.A.. _ _ _ _ _ _ _

Literate~

Persons

Males

Females

Males

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(1)

Illiterate

v----'---'----.......

TOTAL

y - _ _ _..A-_ _ _ """"'\

..------"----~

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

1

Bik In:~r District Total

33Q,329

171,279

15'9.050

29,201

7,lSI

14Z,078

151,869

1.7,070

14,130

:Z

Bilu.n"eJ: Distric' Rural

Ig1,341

95.175

86,166

5.14"0

553

90,035

85,613

8.842

7,433

~

Bikan'_'r (North) Sub-Division Rural

90,246

42,673

2,342

281

45,231

42,392

4.657

3,870

-4

Bikanel' (South) Suh-Divlsion Rural

91,095

43,493

2,798

272

43.221

4,185

3,5'63

-S

Bikarier District Urban

148.988

']6,104

72,884

24,061

6,628

6'6,256

8,228

6,697

-e

B I ka.n ,'r D ist riot U.N. C.

31,875

15,568

16,307

<{,446

1,197

15,110

1,606

l,fl98

7

Bikaner City

117,113

60,536

56,577

19,615

5,41l

61,148

6,622

.,999

.!taB 10-14

AGE 15-24,

,-----------"------

r--------------"----------.--~::_"\
Liter&~

TOTA.L

,-----'-----""'\
Ma.les

Females

(23)

(24)

(1)

Illiter&te.

Litera'6e

'l'O'TA.L

r----"-_.;.-""""'\
Males Fema.les

r---"-----""""'\

_--..A-------.

r---...A.._-"""",\

Males

Females

Ma.les

Females

Male..

Fema.l. .

(25)

(27)

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

(32)

(26)

Biluftlel' District Total

2,243

2,1_

535

160

1.708

l:.9GU

2.824

2.938

888

302

~

Bikaner Distriot Rural

1.378

1,357

33

11

1,345

1.34«1

1,191

1,540

72

28

S

Bikan~r (North)

Sub-DiviJllion Rural

659

663

6

&4'5

657

623

568

50

16

-4

Eikaner (South) Sllb-Divlsicn Rural

719

694.

5

700

689

568

972

22

12

-5

Bik8'liH Distriot

865

772

149

3S.

628

1:,838

1.398

61.8

274

225

190

122

103

14-4

468

313

80

()7

640

582

380

280

479

1,185

1,083

536

207

{I

Bi~r

.,

Biktintn" City

Urban

District U. N. C.

101

AGE 45-5.
,- -----------"----_.

Admini.trative

Unit

(I}

TOTA.L

-------,

Ma.!es Female",

Lit·erate
r----"----.
l\Iales
J!'emales

(47)

(48)

(HI)

(50)

(51)

(52)

,..- _ _ _ ..A.. _ _ ,

Illiterate
r----"---""""'\

Males Females

,-------TOTA.L
,---..A..----,
Males Females
(53)

(54)

Am!: 55-64
..A. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

Literate

IlJiterate

r--_A_~

r--~

1 _ _ _ _ _ ---...

Males

FemalAs

:Males

Females

(55)

(56)

(57)

(58)

).

Bikaner District Total

1,631

1,196

433

36

1,198

1,160

872

606

114

16

758

590

2

Bikaner District Rural

936

649

24

4

912

645

372

199

15

3

357

196

3

Bikaner (North) S. D.

R·

G65

507

10

1

655

506

162

157

7

2.

4

Bikaner (South) S. D. R.

271

142

14

3

267

139

210

42

8

1

202

41

5

Bikaner District Urba.n

695

547

409

32

288

515

500

407

99

18

401

394

6

BikanerDistrict U. N

82

ll2

36

7

46

105

&0

101

16

'1

Bikaner City

613

436

37l"l

l!6

:14.0

410

4"0

306

83

C.

~

1

155

101

71

in an,.

partiallYlit.era-tes i. ,. 1ohoae, ~ho ca.n read. a eimple le,~r
.er~pi: b.u" cannot wriw on:e . .Li"_"e me_an.
£rom Nationa.l Registers of Cltlzens. they wll1 not tally w~th thoae publiilhed ln Table D. VII WhlCh III baaed on alipa.
POPULATION

AGE 5-9
, - - - - - - - - . - - - - - - - " - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -__

AGE 0 - 4

---

,.-----J.----~

"

Illiterate

Literate

,,--_j.__---, ,------"------.

TOTAL

,----___"____--,

,--

TOTAL

Literat.e

--,

Males

Females

l\fales

Females

Males

F,unales

Males

Females

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

r-----~

Males

Illiterate
r----~-------.

Females

(19)

Males

Females

(21)

(22)

(20)

3,520

82()

13,550

18,310

2,203

l,8iO

34

2.0'77

1,778

1

'252

88

8,590

7,345

1,267

1,062

3

i,255

1,059

2

144

57

4,513

3,813

522

483

749

621

3

745

618

3

3,532

426

314

518

8

510

441

4,

31

822

717

I)

9

190

161

S

632

568

7

4,077

31

lOS
'~268
~27

:2,841

'132

4,960

5.965

1,148

1,144

93.

11'&

171

1,179

1,527

193

377

218

2i

561

3,781

.,438

965

767

718

Illiterate
r-----...._---~

86

678

AG'll
___ - - -_ _ _ _ _ _
_.A..25-34
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ --..,

-----------.
Mao}es

4

,;

---~

Literate

Illiterate

~

Literate

Illiterate

,-----"----.,.
1\Iales Females

r-____A._--~ .!I

TOTAL
r----.A.---~

,-- _ _ .A.. _ _ _ --..,

, - _ - - " - _ _ --.

,-- _ _.A.. _ _ _--,

:Males

Males Females

Males Females

Males Females

(39)

(40)

(4,1)

(42)

(43)

(44)

(4.5)

(4,6)

1,170

9G8

1
2

Females

Females

(38)

TOTAL

Males Fema1..

I

(33)

(34)

(35)

'2,136

2,634

2.23a

U~66

861

174

1.375

1,792

1.877

1,058

707

90

1,119

1,512

1,175

1,153

47

24

1,128

1,129

832

337

42

10

790

327

573

552

519

414

28

18

491

396

306

212

29

7

277

205

3

5t6

950

656

739

19

6

637

733

526

125

13

9

513

122

...

1,017

1,122

l,OSI

813

814

150

247

668

1,0,.f5

721

80

380

641

5

888

2.16

168

200

77

29

91

171

157

172

60

12

97

160

6

629

876

893

613

737

121

156

492

88"1

5<19

605

68

283

481

7

(36)

(37)

Ag.65-74
-----"------------.

f_--

Litm·at·

TOTAL

-...----..1"-----, r - - - . . ......_----.,.

Ao:a: 75 & OVER
r - - - - ------~------_____,

Illiterate

Literatp

TOTAL

Illiterate
..A----. ;--

r---J._--~

~---"----

r- _ _

Females

Male",

l'fales

Femahs

;\Iales Females

Males

(59)

(60)

(61)

(62)

(63)

(64)

(65)

(6u)

(67)

602

2:J3

50

8

552

285

486

195

6

"357

19'4

7

5

360

189

386

209

110

2

207

106

243

84

5

ti3

>;3

IH

245

99

43

202

96

100

50

28

52

7

:!I

51

7

HI

~iale8

217

Feulales

47

3tJ

3
1

2

181

4!'i

93

A-. _ _•

AGE NOT STATI<D

, - - - - - - - - - - . A . . __________-.,
TOTAL
• _ _ _ ,.J'--~

Fe- Mall's Fe- J\fales
Females
males
IDales
(69)

(70)

480

195

1

145

38S

145

2

135

243

135

3

HH

10

4

94

50

5

6

11

6

88

39

7

39

6

5

(68)

(71)

172)

Literate

r---..A-_---..

Malos Fe.
males
(73)

(74)

72

c. V-Single Year
Explanatory Not,,;-This table shows for the saw pI" population, the figures by
AGE

,---------------------------------------

o

z

TOTAL

Administrative Unit

---.

r-.------------~~

1

o

1

, -____ .A.. _ _ _ - ,

1\-lales

Females

, -_ _ _ .A.. _ _ _

.l\-Iales

2
~

Ii'emoleE!

r--- j

Porsons

Males

Females

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

Bikaner DiBtrict Total

31,200

17,010

14,130

380

323

384

417

216

1\10]<."

3

----.,..

Ff'males :Males Females'
(10)

(II)

(12)

359

355

489

487

283

242

2

Bikaner District Rural

16,275

8,842

7.433

105

83

215

119

120

3

Bikaner (Nolth) N. D. R.

8,526

4,657

3,870

96

so

9S

11-1-

'In

78

01,

Bikaner (South) t';. D. R.

7.741'

4,1 I'lf:)

3,563

9

3

117

102

43

5

Bikaner District Urban ..

14.925

8,228

6,697

275

240

169

201

240

235

6

Bikaner Di!!ltrict U.::-r.C ..•

3,::;01-

I,HOB

],G98

33

59

31

06

,10

82

7

Bikaner City

11,621

6,622

4,999

242

181

105

~OO

153

~

Administrat.vp Fnit

11

(1)

13

12

1l

r-----'~---~___.._.

r---_"O"_----~

r--~""""--~

,---

lVfnlos

Felna1es

]'dal,:s

J:-.fn]c"

~~a..le~

(~7;

(2R)

12fJ)

(30)

Females

r'enlUles

(:>2)

':\lnl".~

l·'<·n,,,!, -.;

537

273

397

386

458

395

462

535

419

2

Bikaner District Rural

208

143

236

222

298

243

206

404

2C4

3

Bikan~r (North) R. D.

l}(i

54

78

911

114

92

21:l

i·n

89

15f'

123

1M

85

8:-:

20;;

·,
G .,

164

160

152

166

131

215

5

Bikaner Dish'iet Urban ..

130

161

6

Bikaner DiRtrirt U.N.f'.

4S

~1

7

Bikan"r City

8Z

132

206

245
Sf)

162

150

16

\3 1 }

355

Bikaner (South) S. D. R.

110

r---- ...A. _ _ _ ~ r--- ---~-- - - - ,

Bikaner District Total

4

1::9
124

13

1

1,'(' nl,uh',3

1

R.

r----"---~

::\fal.·s Ff'mnles
(:17)

(38)

249

4€0

193

30'i~

.jii

1 :~O

225

62

2(; 1

126

153

Ut,

1 ,).)

31

1 'N

110

:H

14(1

lOS

l;~O

17:.:

o

Z

.,-I

:!G

,----- ---~'~ - - -----.,
l\Ll!' '_,

1·. . enl~t11'....:

::\Ialcs

(.,-1)

( .),;)

III

1

Bikaner District Total

289

2

Bikaner District Rural

177

3

Blkn",,1' (:-.forth) ~. D. R.

:;

Bikaner District Urban

7

I •• kllnor

City

Ac.i1nini';1ratJvC'

,- _ _ _ __A_ _ _ _ ,

?\Iale~

----------...,

V'(,ln3.1('·,~

(i) 7)

(,-,.3)

316

448

426

200

141

224

186

214

144

100

12.)

112

92

.

~l

,)

Females

r- ---,

r--;-.[ 11c's

~n

_. _A._

r----..A.---~___.,

([;9)

212

46

56

47

(04)

228

107

132

70

40

R8

59

61

114

.~

]03

Ft'mnles

(lil)

41

·ttl

7\1 a1,'£-'

Ft'1IJ ITe,",

lOS

8

I

12

11

47

:!7

~f I

38

9G

67

In

11

11i

n:J

11

71

ISS

37

3S

39

40

,,-------"-----.,.
Male" F<'nl<.lo3

r---...A.--~

r--~...A---~

r---J._----~

, - _ _ ...A.._ -

~--_,.~-----,

J...ralp8

79

41

51

4"1

Unit
41

41

:'orales

FcmnJeE!

?Ifile-s

Females

l\fak·",

Female"

]\Ia1<1-<

Feu'l"les

(I)

(79)

(80)

(81)

(8~)

(83)

(84)

('lG)

(SH)

lSI)

(88)

( 8")

1

Bikatler D'3trict Total

142

59

127

66

87

14

460

387

31

166

68

2

Bikaner Dish'iet Rural

60

26

42

16

59

10

130

53

33

30

lo.~

37

3

Blkaner (North) S. D. R,

23

16

22

(;

25

8

4()

28

1(\

21

13

4

Bikancr (Sonth) /::), D. R,

37

10

20

10

34

2

flO

5

Bikaoe r District Urban ..

82

33

85

50

28

4

330

1

64

31

6

Biktll('r Difltrid n.N.C.

5

10

8

H,ka'1er City

77

19

14

8

6

••

44

62

4

Fl'nlulcs
(\)0)

17

334

80

74

2f:i0

76

1

23·

73

Age Returns
siDgle years of a.ge as mentioned in .he slips.
RETURNS

------------------------------- ~
I)
.----~~

4

,...---.A---_.,

6

7

r-~---~

r----J---_.,

_.,

r----..A..--_.,

r----"-----...,

1\Ialc'''' FomalE-A

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

l!'emalea

Males

Females

Males

Females

Jl.fales

Females

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

(L7)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(21 )

(22)

(23)

(24)

484

359

527

480

347

292

439

2e!6

389

352

501

400

280

251

376
200

226

136

291

93

101

192

133

35

99

258

228

236

216

178

13!l

10

9

8
r-----~

184

126

212

137

2:)4

73

65

156

78

1~8

7G

67

III

61

59

75

11fi

200

163

166

227

149

185

101

55

40

26

1,3

32

[>2

:n

145

123

140

182

117

133

67

3

~

CD

(26)

571

540

1

268

340

345

2

18G

13x

154

8

7'.)

202

191

.,

132

231

195

5

23

63

41

6

109

168

164

7

125

102

RETURNS

17
r-----"------.,
Males
Females

HI

18

23

, - - _____ .....A.. _ _ --",

r-----_,.__~-_..

]:t'ema h~"

,-----j---- ~

~2

r---J---~

Males

F,'ma 1""

1\1al(>s

Ff'mn 1""

?f,,1, R

]i'C'malf''''

J\Talf'R

Fomales

(43)

(44)

(45)

(46)

(47)

(48\

(.](1)

(50)

(01)

(:>2)

,--_ _ _ -A-_ _ - ,

r---_,A._-- ~

Males

Ferna les

M:l.les

(41\

(42)

20

21

1

(39)

(40)

288

170

286

471

168

122

381

409

172

135

~Sl

199

291

117

1

109

'76

104

248

54

57

122

109

65

81

106

64

127

62

2

28

52

8(1

2[>

31

49

43

46

40

3.

168

29

26

73

66

182

228

114

65

259

300

40

62

48

179

94

,,~

3S

61

47

us

61

121

176

- - - - -_----80

31

9

90

78

'17

56

169

222

RO

32

51

1()7

-------- - ---

, - - - - _ _ _ ..A.. _ _ _ ........

, - -_ _ _ .A_ _ _ _ - ,

14

33

,--_ _ _ . A . . _ _ - - ,

r---..A..----,

~

34
r----..A...----,
Ma1~g
Fomale"

Females

Males

Females

Males

Fomales

(65)

(Go)

(67)

(6 8 )

(69)

(70)

(71)

(72)

\7'1,1

(74)

485

520

88

103

200

2001

104

46

131

244

209

I'll

77

119

143

71

21

114

117

26

15

28

38

ti

70

2f)

62

115

3f)

16

3S

P6

81

61

31

25

IT,

17

2

17

fiG

44

311

Sf)

73

276

2:'18

RHITURNB

22

28

4

135

164

155

5

11

6

uo

-------------- - -----

Mal"'s

331

22

Ill)

Female"

59

88

10

l'l{aleA

154

50

35
r-------"----,
~'[.tl"s

~

36

C

r---..A..

.~

_l!'enlales

Males

(76)

(77)

(7 8 )

409

253

82

39

1

229

125

38

43

13

It

10:~

2.)

Ui

11

3

126

100

20

15

284

8

5

10

2'!8

Female.' III

20

:!

215

av

28

47

6

.

1(\8

33

22

-----------------------------------------------

43

44

r-----A----~

45

45

4.
r----'-----...
l\faks Fomal<,s

___

,------.._~

r---_"_--~

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males Females

J:\.Ia.les

Fomales

(91)

(~2)

(93)

(94)

(95)

(96)

(97)

(98)

(9m

79

81

212

60

367

234

179

197

54

64

184

50

182

72

87

23

54

96

39

131

29

31

10

88

11

61

25

17

28

10

1

11

24

15

r-

T

6

48
r------"----.,

49

Z
iii

Males Females

r15

r-----~_., .~

:MalcB

Females

(100)

(J (1)

(102)

(103)

(104)

112

54

89

62

104

34:

1

180

60

36

68

43

79

28

2

80

177

57

44

37

46

25

3

43

7

3

3

1

6

33

3

185

162

92

17

52

18

21

19

26

3

28

36

2

IS

3

1

2

7

157

126

5:>

13

18

18

23

92

17

.,

,
IS
6

6

7

74

C. V-SiDgle Year
------------~--------

/;0

51

,.- ____ -"-----,

r---.J\------,

Malo8

Females

1\1a1cs Females

(1 )

(105)

(tOn)

~

Bikaner District Total

374

369

82

2

Bikaner District Rural

161

78

"\<i'Jlinistrative Unit

52
r------"-----,
Males li'f'males

53
54
.~&
,.- ___.J\-___ --., r------"------" , - - - - " - - - - - "
:M..les Females
Males Females Males Female"

(JOS)

(109)

(110)

(llI)

(112)

(113)

(114)

(115)

(llfl)

35

90

34

130

59

104

118

194

14ft

68

24

58

24

92

56

81

108

59

37

26

11

51

26

liS

83

14

~4

(l07)

3

R,kall"r (North) S. D. H.

J::!O

61

.,12

23

4

B,kan'_'"

41

17

~6

1

32

13

41

31l

13

25

45

13

.5

Bik:l:1el' District

213

291

14

11

32

10

38

3

23

10

135

109

«l

B,k ,neT lJistrict U. N. C.

40

63

2

2

3

3

2

I

14

!:!2

173

228

12

9

29

7

36

9

121

87

(South) S. D. R.

Urban

23

2

AGE

o

z

63

Aclminl.'>tYative Uuit

(1)

1

Bik :t08r District Total

65

64

,.- _ _ .A-____ ~

r----..A..---..,

.\Iales

Femalos

Males

Females

(13P

(132)

(133)

45

16

22

66

67

r-----"-----,
Males Females

r-----..A.--_,
Males

Females

(134)

(135)

(136)

(137)

(131;)

(139)

(140)

(141)

47

107

50

26

12

86

30

86

15
15

,-----"-------" r---:.A-- - --"
Males Females Males Femalf"B
(142)

2

Bikfl.ner District Rural

17

12

10

23

41

22

21

12

43

28

46

"3

B,kcuwr (NoTt,h) S. D. H"

I>

II

6

19

10

13

20

II

24

15

21

12

4

B;]'::'lDer (South) S. D. l~.

11

I

4

4

31

9

1

1

UJ

13

25

3

-5

Bikaner District Urban

28

4

12

24

66

28

5

43

2

6

g,kan<>r Distri,,; U. N. C.

4

I

2

II

20

I

7

Blk'~!le~'

11

22

5,'1

8

4

Oity

2

43

2

38

-\dministrative Unit
76

(1)

81
80
,.---.A.-_ _ , r-----.J\----.

,.---~----,

77
,-----"-----,

Male"

Femalos

l\lales

Fema.lE's

( 1;)7)

(158)

(15\) )

(160)

(161)

(162)

(163)

(164)

(1(',5)

78
,------'----.,
.Males l<'emales

79
,-___ ..A._-----"
Males Females

Males Females

MaleA

l!'emaJeH

(166)

(167)

(168)

:l

Bikauer District Total

88

15

34

19

69

36

24

42

79

48

]7

2

2

Bik'lller District Rural

86

15

33

19

55

35

21

40

50

17

11

1

3

Blkaner (North) S. D. It.

H3

15

:n

17

54

34

12

40

20

15

4

Bikancr (South) S. D" R.

2

2

I

1

9

30

I

11

1

5

Bikaner District U.rban ..

14

1

6

1

6

I

2

1

1

7

Bik~ner

Oity

13

2

1

3

2

29

31

2

1

1

5

1

1

28

26

AGE

.\dministrative Ullit

S9
Males

(1)

(183)

1

Bik'lner District Total

2

Bikaner District Rural

3

Bikaner (North) S. D.

4

B'kelner (South)S. D. P. ..•

~

Biltanel'District Urban

(l

Btkaner District U. N. O.

'7

Eikaner City

92

91

r---...A----~

r----_;.._--~

_ _ _ ..A... _ _ _ "

Females

:Males

Females

1\IaJes Females

Males

Females

(85)

(186)

(87)

(188)

(190)

(191)

(192)

13

1

r--~J,._--__"'\

Females NIales
(184)

(189)

,-~_..,).__

_ _ _ ----...

, - _ _ _ -A- _ _ ---..,

l\TaJes
(193)

Females
(11)4 )

1

1

13

1

1

13

1

1

R.

1

1

75

Age Returns-( Con-old. )
Hll:TURNS

,---

- - - - - - - --- ---- ,._;
r - - _ _ ..A.. _ _ _ _ --.,

58
,---_ _..A.. _ _ --..,

Females

ILl,lo,o;

I;'umales

Males Females

(118)

( 119)

(1:!0)

(121)

(122)

(123)

(124)

(125)

(126)

(127)

(128J

(129)

(130)

56

:\Tales

_57

---.

~1l7)

59
r-----"-----..,
Males Females

60

61

Males Females

Males Females

Males

Females

62
.S
.-______;.._-----. .----"----, .----"------..,
....

~

63

19

69

16

77

£9

56

22

235

277

69

8

52

26

1

2S

8

,j 2

13

41

26

20

20

96

37

45

6

16

l'i'

2

7

:~G

11

17

19

12

20

26

14

6

8

1

fi

:24

7

8

72

11

31

11

27

36

3

36

2

139

240

14

1

1

1

2

2

10

:.!(j

2

34

37

3

36

1

3

36

2

64

1

176

103

3

13

I

36

9

5

2

6

7

7

o

---------------------------------------------------------------------- Z
70

69
r-

, - -_ _ _ _i'- _____

-"------.,

Males

Females

, 1-13)

(iH)

34

25

. -_ _ ....,A....~_~

. -_ _ _ _ ..A.. _ _ - ,

.~
00

Ff'males

:Malos

Females

Males

:Femalee

~rRles

Females

(lW)

(147)

(148)

(HO)

(150)

(151)

(152)

(153)

(104)

( 155)

l I /';6)

86

39

13

28

24

39

14

62

24

109

21

13

22

23

13

13

49

24

78

13

2

7

7

7

45

15

43

13

3

16

6

6

4

9

3['

1

26

1

13

1

1

1

23

52

21

37

18

]0

35

[2

17

J1

:20

II

43

-~

:l\Iales

33

1

Oil

7fj
, - - - - _A__

Females

95

1('
.)

74
.---..A---r-,

:iHales

;'laIc,,; Females

15

73
.----"----,

72

71
~

65

2

6"

1

3

4

31

8

5

1

]2

1

1

1

29

7

HETURNS

7

o

Z
82
f-

S:'l

---~ -~~

,~-

-

__

84

bfi

86

..P- ------.,

~---_I..._--- --~

,.-----~..,------

~Iales

1----"--- ~
::'I'[al'-'8 J<'ernales

Fen~all'''

:\["].'8

F'em,.lc'"

:\[.11 'K

FerrInIe8

_\1:aIe;;

l,'cJnnjps

l1·lH)

(170)

(lil J

!l72)

(173)

(174)

(17ii)

(176)

4

1

4

'7

1

2 '~

1

<1

'7

1

21

1

..

Males

(1 77)

Oil

88

87

, - -_ _ _A_ _ _ _

~

J<~ernales

~~

r---_A_ - - _
1\1Hlei': F .. Hlales

iZ)

<l8 2 }

\180)

1181 \

1

2

1

1

2

2
:~

-t

1

21

7

1

2

2

1

6

2

1

6

5
6

3

RF,'ll'HNS

7

-- - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ,
-

!)S

(H)

...... _ _ -...

100

100 ulid Over

r----"-----\

, -_ _ _A.. - - - - - ~

r----"----~

:\l,l1es

F .. rnale;;

1\10.1es

r---.,..A_------...
1\1ales Femalei':

(l GO)

!2(0)

(201)

!17

.,----"--

.,---------~-,

~1 scl,10s

l~"e­

::\fales

(10.»

male.;
(IH6)

(197)

1

3

FornaleR
(HIS)

r--- _ _ _ J

FC'males

::\fnle",

Female"

]'.1 .. 11"8

(205)

(206)

(207)

1

4

3

1

1

(203)

(204)

Fr'IDa1<'H

Age Not :-;tnted
r- - _ -'. . . . - ----,
l\loles

F. Ii",leF<

(20~)

('?1 0 )

1

2

..

4

1

3

3

5

1
7

76
D. I-Language
(i) Mother Tongue
liIxp/a1Zat(Jry Note:-Table

D. I. has been prepared in n-wo parle D. I. (i) and D. L (ii). D.1. (i) shoW'R languages
as mother tongue togetber with the number of speakers split up into sexes.

spoken

BIKANER DISTRICT

,-

--..

..A..

Speakers as a mother
tongue
J.._ _ _ _ _

r - - - ___

~_I-

--..

____

N arne of Languages
( 1)

1

1\Iales

(2)

(3)

(4)

Rajasthani Total

306,937

161,591

145,346

(a) Baja.sthani

1,223

657

566

44

23

21

3,755

471

3.284

71<9

aH2

397

Hi4

71

93

(b) Ajmeri

..

,

Bagri or Shekhawati

(0)

(d) Bikaneri

..

..

(e) Dhundhari or Jaipuri .•

14

,f) Rarauti

14

(g) Malwi, Rangari or Ahiri

[>2

:.lO

:i2

2U9,8\19

] 5!1 47;~

140,421)

(i) Mewari

fi4

21

33

(j) Rathi

tllii

407

260

(k) Dhabadi

22 0

(l) Dhado

5'5

fit)

Western Hind) Total

17,183

6623

10,560

(a) Western Hindi

f\3

~2

41

(b) Brij Bhasha

174

8U

85

16,1\1;~

6,170

10,023

75',

~42

411

(h) Marwari

2

Females

_.Persono

(01

Hindi

(<1)

Urdu

...
r· •

:...:0

3

Behari

4

4

4

Bengali

105

45

60

5

Eastern Pahari

4

2

2

6

Kanjari or Sansi (Gipsy)

1

1
76

7

Gujrati

1:10

8

Marathi

H9

16

83

9

Punjabi

3,420

1,f~9

1,821

10

Telugn

11

4

7

11

Sindbi

2,350

1.252

1,098

12

Tamil

14

12

2

13

Kasbmiri

40

39

1

14

Eastern Hindi

18

~

16

1.5

Asiatic Langnages

13

13

Burmese

13

.,
1"

330.:!29

17J,,:~79

(a)

TOTAL OF ALL LANGUAGES

54

159050'

77
D. I (H)-Bilingualism
E,xplanatory .z\Tote:-It shows the motcher

tongue and subsidiary languagEs mo-.;t; commonly ,;pokon alorg with them.
The rnothar tongue of infants ha.s been considered to be the same as that of their mothers.
SUR.'lfDl AHY

Total
Speakers

,Mother tongue

Total persons
returned as speaking a language
Subsidiary to that
sbown in column

LA NGUAG ~,;S

,----------------------------"Vestern
Hindi

Rajasthuni

( 4)

(:3)

Gujrati

~indhi

(6)

(7)

l::'unjabi

No, 1

(1)

(2)

(8)

BIKANER DISTRIC'l'
1

RAJASTHAN!

308,937

14,148

2

Western Hindi

17,183

4,930

3

Behari

4

BengalI

13,9406
4.731)

43

lOci

I!)

12

5

]58

4

105

28

:z;_;

2

.)

1

2

.5

Eastern Pabari

4

1:\

Kanjari or Sansi (Gipsy)

1

1

uujrati

130

47

31

H

l\'Iar~thi

99

51

::50

1

9

Punjabi

3,420

1,176

1,071

57

10

Sindhi

2,350

635

556

11

'ralnil

14

5

12

Telugu

11

2

13

Kashmiri

40

3

3

14

Eastern Hindi .•

18

5

5

15

Asiatic

13

6

1

1

1

SUBSIDIARY LANGUA,;ES--(Conc!d.)

Mother tongue

Madrasi

(1)

(9)

(10)

8

1

RAJASTHAN [

2

2

\Vestern Hindi

3

3

Behari

4

Bengali

5

Eastern Pahari ••

6

Kanjari or Sanosi (Gip"y)

1

Gujr"ti

H

lVIB.ratbi

9

Punjabi

10

Sindhi

11

Tamil

12

Telugu

1"

Kashmid

14

Eastern Hindi ••

15

Asiatic

,~

"'.
".

...

Sanskt'lt

Mar:1tl,i

Bengali

Behari

( 13)

(11)

11

3

78
D. n-Religion
P;"'PlanatM"}' Note.-Tnis table sbows the distribution of population by

main religions found in this district.

TOTAL POPULATION

~
....

Administrath'e Unit

Sikhs

Hindu"

r·---------_y.._------ -~ r-------_A_------...

15

Z

r----"-----,
Males

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

P('w!'0nS

Jains

r---.A.---:-;

Females

FemalEs

<l)

Ul

(1 )

(8)

(9)

(10)

1

Bikaner Dlstrict Total

330,329

171,279

159,050

139,301

129,089

367

316

11,678

11,978

2

Bikaner District RUJ.'d.l

181,341

95,175

86,166

83,940

75,828

66

38

3,046

3,153

3

Bikaner (North) Sub-Diyision IhlTf.J

UO,246

47,573

42,673

41,541

36.688

569

703

4

Bikaner (South) 8ub-Dlvis;on Hul'"l

91,095

47,602

43,493

42.399

39,140

66

38

2.477

2,450

5

Bikaner District Urban

148,988

76,104

72.884

55,361

53,261

301

278

8,632

8,825

{}

Bikane! District Debar :-\on-City

31,1:575

]6,668

] 6,307

]0,333

11,044

2]

19

4.774

4,875

7

Bikan8r Oity

117,113

60,530

56,577

45,028

42,217

280

~59

3,858

3,950

Buddhists
r - ____
-..A. _ _ _ _ - ,
6

Z

ce
';::

'"

w

Zoroastrians

,.- _ _ _

Muslims

-......A...._~--~

, - _ _ _...J.,_ _ _ _ _ _ _

Christians:

~

r-..-----...A._--~--

Adn1.1nist r n\ lve Unit,
:\:3]1"8

l:'emaJee

Males

Females

l\lales

Females

Mnles

Fernal">,,

( 11)

(12)

(]3)

( 14)

(15)

(16)

(17)

( 1.'i)

70

( 1)

1

Bikaner District To"tal

19,874

17,526

58

~

Bikaner District RuraJ

8,123

7,147

;,-.

3

Bikaner (North) Sub-Di vi~io;' Rnnll

5,463

5,282

-4

Bikaner (South) Sub-Did~ion BUTa]

2,660

1,865

~

Bikaner Djsb.ict Urb~ll

11,751

10,449

6

Bikaner District Urhan Non-Cit,"

440

369

7

Rikaner City

11,311

10,080

1

1

1

1

1

1

---...

58

70

58

70

D. III-Scheduled Castes and SCheduled Tribes
"hn\l s th" strength of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes as notified. by the Gove "11ment of India. 'l'heir names etc. cnn be seen in Annexure "G'·. No area of this district has
oeen declared {LS seheduled hence there is no return of S('heduled Tribes.
Scheduled Tribps

Scheduled Castes

0

Z

Admi"istr"t.ivt> l'nit,

:§
....

r-~-----.---,.---

Males

Females

PeTsons

l\Iales

I"ema](_'s

(2)

(3)

(4)

('J)

(n)

(7)

Person;,

'"

en
11)

------ --~ r - - - - _ - - - - " - - - - - - - - - - - - ,

1

Bikaner District Total

41,913

20,930

20,983

2

Bikaner District Rural

32,571

15,814

16.757

3

Bikaner (North) Sub-Division Rural

10,433

5,648

4,785

4

Bikaner (Sou!h) Sub-Divl~ioll nun,}

22,138

10,166

11,972

6

Bikaner District Urban

9,34'l

5,116

4,226

6

BikanfH' D:stric1, Urban Non-City

3,041

1,':177

1,564

7

Bikaner Ci~y

6,301

3,639

2,662

...

IO:I

79

D. IV-Migrants
Explanatory NOle:-This table give>! the distribution of population enumerated in this district according to their place of birth.

ENUMERA.'l'ED
BIKANER

IN

ENUMERA.'rED

THE

BJRANER

DISTRICT

r---------""----------..
District. State eto., or
Country where born.

persons

Males

District, 6tate etc. or
Country where born.

Femalos

(I)
(ll

A. I-Districts within
Rajasthan
Jaipnr
2

Tonk

3

!::<awai Madhopur

4

Bharatpur

fi

Alwar

I)

Jhunjhunu

7

Sikar

~

Bikaner

!I

Ch U!,U

(3)

(2)

(4)

2,048

5\,19

1,449

13

P. E. p. s. U.

145

14

Punjal>

699

365

33

15

Saurasl>tra

Hl5

107

8B

J6

Travancore Cochiu

17

Uttar Pradesh

444

224

220

IF:

Delh;

109

404

158,163

143,711

1,310

630

780

777

258

519

9,610

5,276

4,334

J::J

Barl):lpr

]3

Jalore

]4

Pali

15

Nagaur

1,253

270

983

16

Ja;s'lolmer

2,381J

5-H

1,839

?

2

2,561

],385

l-;anR\\~ara

::?1

Chitto r 5 a['h

2:2

I3hihval'a

2 "')

Kotah

:;4

Bund;

211

JhalFnvar

116

Orissa

Jodhpur

2'!

105

12

11

Dungarpur

(<Ie)

155,429

(~allganagar

1H

(3)

167,157

513

SirOfl i

Females

Males

3~2,586

10

17

;\>ladbya Bharat

TR'E

r-----------~----------~
Persons
(2)

11

1:N

DISTRICT

55

3

3

Total

A

325,269

168,620

156,649

5,027

2,628

2,3Q9

17

15

2

B-Countries in ASia
Beyond India
1

Pakistan

2

Nepal

3

Burma

10

Total
1.176

B

5,060

2,659

2401

171,279

1S9,050

C-Countries in Europe
England

109

109

2

France

Total

C

24

D -- Conntries in Africa
26

26

Total

E

A-II--States in Iud,;:,
beyond Raj'l,-;;th,n

2,683

1,463

D

Countries in America

1,220
Total

E

12
F - Ccuntrks in Austraha

41

.-,

"'ost Hongul ..

~

Eihar

f,

Bombay

';'

JalnTi.1U

73

14!
7(i

Total

F

c --p. t S'e~
Total

and Kashlnir

Total ReturnEd
\1

::'>IadtJy" Pl'ade<lh

90

282

55

30

25

Birth Place not Returned

GRAND TOTAL OF
POPU:.ATION

330,8~9

80

r.

[

.....
.....

j

I

I

~I

~I

§I

~
I
i
l

~I

=
00

8co

co

(

I

c:o

i

0:>

."

._

-{

I

~~
t3j

=
.....
co

j

.....

.....
=

~

--....

l
[

I

=
......

co
<:>

C!:J,

~I
~

~I

=
=

I
!
I

=

I
l

<0
.....

00

-£0.....

r

I
I

i

j

I
,

Ci1
(:)

~

~
~

CD

1!

~

-~

~

->-

:i:i'
~

~!
~I
."..,
C3 "
....;j~

""<:ll
~l

;:;;'1

~I

!

I
[

L

,r

-<

C!:J,

l

~I

....

1I

,

I

<:0

I

:::::'1
S:;,
~,

-

-<

00

<0

I
I
I

L
(

!,
I
1
,I

-<

i
I
I

I

L

...."
"'=_

lQ

l

....

<0

81
f

'"

-='"E:

I

'"

<ij
<.J

:E
...:

j

.....

CD

~

""

I

""II -='"
l
CD

~

[

--

<D

I ""'

..!e

-~
">,
CD
~

<d

S

--(

I

I
I

L

'"
Q)

d

;:3

r
Q)

OIl

CD

::l
::l

CI(:

""'0....""

D-t

I

II

r.:
<>
.;:::
a>

8

<
!:IS

8

'-'

-<

~

I

OS

\
r-

I

d'"
::;

(
I

Q;

Q.)

S
....

--(

.-~

C!:I

I

!:IS

-4

::s

L

;:I

-

I

I

''"d

,>

I

(

.-

CD

"'"

\

;<;-

oo

~

'Z

~

<U

~

0;

I

~

00

I

=
!C
0

_.

....0>

l'

....!5

a
CD

::!:

'"

..;:;
~
::Q

I

,
I

l
(
,

A

")

C1>

c:;

:::>..
oeD

:,...:.

8

'"

;.:..

'"
.$
cd
;:;a

~

01::
'"
as

0..

.......

.-<

C1>

5"
.......

co

.$
d

:?

:=>

35

d
S
Co>

0.>

r-

I
1

-{

I

)

r

o:i
;;::.:

1>

~

e;z

C'oJ

-

eo:.

<:':I

<=

~

C!

c--..

-<

!

J
j

I
L

'

oo

..,
<=
a:

2;-

"'en"'

C1>

d
,_,

'-::.

~

"
2

~
'"
~

-:
,:_.

ao

QC

C1>

CD

l.
~

~

<:D

I ....
-<
l

<:)

~

<.>

I ::.e

.-.{

=

00

"c;;

..c

:

1_

0;

L
a:I

JO;

.:::
....-.

.;-")

,

~

'-'

-,

....
....

.....
....
....

C':I

"""

c..

d

a;

::>

;:::;

'-

~

s:l

-~
w

g

....
::s

.::0

.3

on
.;;

z

-a

-

E-<
...,.

ClCI

or;

;,.

~

B

<:.>

:s
...

..::l
_,

,_,

::c
....

0
·c

.l!1

0

0

.l!1

'"

0

:0

<:.>

~

...c

:::

';3

-a

~
·4...~N

rU!.I"'s

....ciios

-

~

~

....
~

G>

9

"

..0

:::l

en

;..

,:,..

<:::

..!t:

iii

:5

~

&':>

::s

0:1

"'p...' '

~
c:C

.><:

a:i

...

..0

....

t::>

~

~

c

::::
cd

--s

.. -""..

::s

_t-.

c

";:;;
...,.

::_:,

:-'-::

~

.l>II

iii

'-'
r_5
'"

i:s
~

CD

~

.><:

:0

=

I>-.

c...
.,

-=
ce

.><:

C5

.,_

82

D. VII-Educational_
EXPLANA.TORY N02'E.-It shows eduoational standards of population. Persons who do not come upto any of the standards
literates i. e. those who can only read but cannot wri~. The figure. of literacy in this table have
of

National Registers of Oitizens

.0

by

lobe

Adm.inisl;ratiYe Unit

r-

J3

enUnlerators.

This

explains

Literate

TOTAL

Z

:3....

prepared

the

reason

of

Middle School

............---.

r-------"------__. r-------"---------.

Persons

Males

Females

Persons

Males

Females

Peraolls

Males

Females

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

BDumer DiBtrict Total

37,011

29,778

7,233

H,217

22,729

8,488

2,420

2.026

394

2

Bikaner District :aural

5,369

4.818

551

3.861

3.320

541

110

101

9

3

Biksner (North) Sub-Division Rural ••

2.531

2,248

283

2.413

2.132

281

67

65

2

4

Bikaner (South) Sub-Division Rural ••

2,838

2,570

268

1,448

1,188

260

43

36

7

5

Bikaner D:istrict Urban

31,642

24,960

6.682

25.356

19,409

5,947

2,310

1,925

385

6

Biksner District Urban Non-City

6.093

4,815

1.278

5.618

4.365

1,253

:.->86

265

21

7

Bikaner City

25,549

20.145

'5,404

19.738

15.044

2,024

1,660

364

\l)

1

4,594

D. Vn-Educational
Teaching

<:)

Z

Administrative Unit

~
0.;

IZl

(1)

Persons

Males

Females

(26)

(27)

1

Bikaner District Total

62

54

2

Bikaner District Rural

19

19

S·

Bikaner (North) Sub-Division Rural

4

Bikaner (South) Sub-Division Rural

19

19

5

Blkaner District Urban

43

35

6

Bikaner District Urba.n Non-Chy

4

4

3;

31

7

13ikaner City

-"'"

Engineericlg

, - - _ _ _ _ _ _A_ _ _ _ •_ _- ,

-

Agriculture

r:------~-"'.-------~

.,...----r---.-_A.__--_~--..

Persons

Malek

Females

Persons

(28)

(29)

(30)

(31)

8

23

23

1

1

8

22

22

8

21

2.1

!I'_.

Males

Fcmp-Ies·

(3~)

(33)

(34)

6

6

6

6

6

6

83

standards
specified in the Table and who are litera.tes are classified under the first category" literate". Literates do not include partially
been obyine41 b". sorting t.he slips wbile those published in the p.e.A. or Village Direotory have been copied from the abstra.cts
difference if any.

Degrees or Diploma.s

Intennediate in Arts or
Scienoe

M.triculate or S. L. O.
Higher Secondary
J<...

-"-.-------.

~

Graduate in Arts or
Scient'S

--"-------. r-

r-

..A..,_._ _ _ --,

Post-Graduate in
Arts or Soience

..

i

\r->---~

'e
...

P.

M.

F.

P.

M.

F.

P.

M.

F.

P.

M.

F.

P.

M.

,F.

(n)

(12)

(13)

(14.)

(15)

(16)

(17)

(18)

(19)

flO)

(21 )

(22)

(23)

(:!4)

(25)

2.523

2,115

108

548

495

48

2,108

2,213

95

501

474

27

103

13

58

i

"0

57

8

8

1,332

1,332

7

7

2

2

2

34

34

6

6

11

11

6

ti

1

1

3

24

23

1

2

2

1,321

1,321

1

1

2,465

2,258

207

535

487

48

976

881

494

467

123

122

1

37

35

2

21)

28

16

16

2,3402

2,136

206

493

452

40

947

853

478

:1-;,1

95

94

1

en

1.

<1

27

101

88

13

27

101

88

13

5
6

7

standards-(Ooncld.)
Commerce

Veterinary
r-------"-------..,

r-~-----"-------.

P.

M.

F.

P.

M.

(35)

(36)

(37)

(38)

(39)

3

3

8

8

3

:1

3

3

Legal

8

8

8

8

Medical

,-r-___--A.. _ _ _ - - - - ,

,----

F.

P.

F

P.

M.

(40)

(41)

(4:!)

(43)

( !.!)

97

96

1

43

97

96

3

3

94

~3

IT

1

1

Oth"rs

__.'\-------, r-.----_A_ ----:--____
M,
(4!)

3t

43

34

4

4

3~

30

<5

Z
~

F

P.

M.

1".

(40'3)

(47)

(48)

(±fj)

37

9

9

li

~<l:>

00

1,462

1,425

1,303

1,303

2

4

4

3

1,299

1,299

159

122

37

5

2

1

1

6

167

121

36

7

I

-1

84

E-Summary Figures by Administrative Units
Ex"l~natory Note:-In this tabi" area, population, density. and the distribution of population by livelihood classes are shown
for the district and each Tehall wIth the COl"Il6aponding rural and urban break up.

The ilgHr.. s of IM·eB. against each unit have been entered as supplied by the District O:£ficer. The total
area of the district as supplied by the Surveyor General, India. has been given against. the name of the
district within brackets.
There are only 2 Sub-divisions in this district. The density of 1941 has been calculated on the present
ar.. ", figures of the District. Density figures fo:r tehsils have been worked out for total area of the tehsil
onl_;, wilhou t rural-urban split up because the area figures of most of the towns were not availa.ble,

Percentage Variation

Population
Area In

Density

-.. r------"-----_

....... r-----.A-__

-'-

~q~

mIles

Adrninistratiye UnIt
ci
Z

7

j:>

Persons

Vl

(])

2

a

--,

r-

.~

1

1941

1951

Bikaner District
Total
RUral
Urban

( 2)

18,447)
10,150

Males

Persons

(6)

(4}

(5)

330,329
181,341
148,988

171.279
95,175
76,104

159.050
86,166
72,88«

234.677

121,428

113,249

90,246
144,431

47.573
73,855

42,673
70,576

194,864
52,511
142,353

100,188
27,443
72,74[5

94,676
25,068
69,608

117.113

60,536

56.577

1931-1941

1951

1941

r·--.A..-........

Females

(3)

1941-1951

303,836
HI7,035
136,801

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

+8'7
+8'6
+8'9

+34'8
+19'8
+59'2

33

30

Bikaner (North) Sub-Dh'i,ioft

4
5
~

Total
Rural
Urban

7,047

33

9

Bika.ner TehsilTotal
Rural
Urban

10

Bikaner City

11

Gangashahr Town

8,819

4,143

4,676

]2

Bhin ••• r TOWI,

4,3(;1

2,097

2,264

13

Napasar Town

5.857

2,H74

2.883

14-

Dssbnoke Town

(;,203

2.99,,5

3,208

39,813
37,735
2,078

21,2·10
20,130
1,1 J()

18,573
17,601)
n6S

l~

3,103

95,652

49,851

Hl,095
4,557

47,602
2,249

45.801

31

3,102

43,493
2,308

4,557

23,541
23,541

12,383
12,383

11,158
II,15S

18
18

72,111
67,554
4,557

37.468
35,219
2,249

34,643
32,335
2,308

40

7
'8

15

16
18

Lunkaransar TehsilTotal
Rural
Urban

~,flI2

3,135

50

, ,

Bikaner (South) .8ub-Division

18
.l.~

20

·21
22
23
24
-25

26

Total
Rural
Urhan

I

K Jlayat (,,"I agra) TehsilTote,}
1,281
Rural
1,281
tTl'ban
Nokha TehsilTotal
Rura'
Urban

1,822
1,821
1

29

...

37
4- ,55 7

85
E-Summary Figures by Administrative Units--- (Contd.)
Livelihood Classes

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ .A_

Agricultural Classes
r--------------------------------~

I-Cultivators of land
wholly or mainly owned
and their dependants

Administrative Unit

II-Cultivators of land
wholly or mainly unowned
and their dependants

- - - - - - - -------- -

Ill-Cultivating labourers
and their dependants

o

Z

,,--_ _ _ _ ..Jt..... _ _ _ _ _ _ ,

r - - - ___

Females

Maies

Male"

(I)

1
2

3

Bikaner District
Total
Rural
Urban

~_..Jo...._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ~

,~----~----

---~

Fernales

_\lales

}1.... 01nales

(I5)

(16)

(11)

(l~)

( I :I)

(14)

60,038
57,524
2.514

f14,020
51,466
2,554

3(1,685
28,214
2,471

28,537
26,006
2,531

501
380
1£1

-

-

- --

~

IV -Non-c'ulti,-ating ""vnerR
of land; agricultural rent
receivers and theIr
depen' Ian t,s
r-----

(17)

( 18)

374
287
107

864
652
212

745
585
160

201

391

329

~4

17\1
21'!

Bikan .. ,. (No,.th) Sub-Dtei-rton

4

..

8

9

10

Total

32,760

29,290

13,460

12,612

Rural
Urban

30,344:!,416

26,834
2.456

Il,-I-3t.

10,5U:~

:!Jl~.l

~, l ~ ~,

22,281
20,345

:20,00;;

6.0;,1
4,11 (j
1,!1:'15

~-;~ Hi:2
3,\1-1-4

1t'l3

2,O;!~

f]7

BikHuer Tehsil-Total
Rural
Urban

Bhiftl<.sar Towll

I:-~

N apa'lar TO"'ll

I'i

Dalilhnoks Town

15

49~

524

17

12

Rikaner City

1~

1IJ
]..

1,93t~

18,46;;
2.040

Lunkaransar TehsiITotal
Rural
Urban

235
746

IU7

103

gc:

~L:!

1(;0

I·H)

106
19

124-

lOG

169
160
223
ti3

] .}~

IH)

714

1(;

1 ,'
"

~1

800

49'

4li9

\)47

10,47~

7_40J'1
7,:31 fI

480

8,785
8,369
4-16

no

6,640
6 • .:>51)
81

n,909

107

1.013

35

17

,,

12tl
126

~~

II

106

106

BikaHer (South) Sub-Divinoll

18
lO

Total

27.278

24.730

17.225

15.925

24,6~2

241

173

27,180

] (), 77H

l;;,i)O:~

US

4-4ti

4·")')

173

98

237
4

7,679
7,67\.

],S2H

] .652

207

](i7

1,S~:'

1,6f)~

23

Kolayat (Mag-ra) TehsilTotal
R,·HI4
Rural
8.494
-Urban

~07

167

24
2.')
26

Nokha. TeheilTotal
Rural
e"ban

18,784
IS,6SH

17,051
l(i,9.'i:l

14,1I .• n

15,3!Hl

:1+

(1~

9H

446

14,273
13,8;,J
4::'_

20
21

22

Rural
Urban

a,
I

416
'i16

1:11

123
123

121

35()

29&

:>5

2115

86

E-Summary Figures by Administrative Units -( Ooncld.)
Livelihood Cl88ses (emuld.)

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ -A-_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - .

Non-agricultural ClaRs",;;

r - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ . A . _ . _ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -------~
Persons (Including dependants) who derive
principal
means
from
...J.- _ _ their
___
____
_ _ _of
_livehhuod
_____
_ _ _ _ _ _ --.
A<ilnini,.;cratiYL' UIli t

,-Y -Production other
than cultivation

VI-Commerce

VII-Transport

VIII-Other services
and miscellaneous
SDUrCe1l!.

,--_ _ _ _ ..A._ _ _ _ _ _ _
~

_ _ _ _ _A._ _ _ _ _ ~

2\fales
(1)

Bikaner District
Total
Rural

\l~)

,,-------..}..__-----~

.r----.-~---.__.,

Female ..

:Males

Females

(,20)

(21)

\ -'~')'
-I

Males
(23)

I,j"'elnales

Males

FQmlitlps

(24)

(25)

{2ti)

41,766
4,285
37,481

39,774
3,912
35,862

9,035

20,151
2,067
18,087

20,590
2,120
13,470

4,92G

4,404
239
4.166

18,480
1,206
17,274

18,725
1,181
17,544

5,056
165
4,8!n

4,280
J42
4,J38

39,863
2,923
36,940

38,051
2,702

U,9SfJ

9,761
1,048
8,713

Bikanf'!" TehsilTotal
Rural
Urban

Ip677
751
1),926

9,371
702
8,669

17,757
726
17,031

18,030

755
17,276

4-,977
86
4,891

4,228
90
4,138

37,(1)7
1,300
36,697

36,Hl3
l,n02
35,191

10

Hikant'r City

8,135

6,947

12,979

12,525

4,649

3,95]

33,319

31. 738

11

Ganga-shahr Town

765

691

1,608

2,023

129

111

],491

1,691;

12

Bhinasar Town

413

396

491

658

84

55

808

796

13

N a.pas •• r To",vn

372

328

1,06.5

1,08 ;

3

6

723

591'1

U

Deshnoke Town

239

307

888

086

26

15

356

366

15
16
17

Lunk .. ransar TehsilTotal
Rural
Urban

481
427

723
480
243

61)5
426
269

711
79

52
52

1,866
1,623
243

1,858
1,700

54

390
346
44

69
557
3lZ

~45

523
:.22

1,674
861
81'1

1,865
939
026

188
153
35

124
97
27

1,903
1,362
,4]

1,723
1,:nO
513

;i87
387

358
358

387
387

368
368

IOU

lOa

72
72

856
856

741
741

482

487
;6.3
322

1,287
474'H3

1,497
.71

88
:'53
3.

52
25
27

1,047
[} 6
.• 41

469
.113

1
2
3

Urban

12,027
1,73i
10,29.;:J

10,606

1,571

5,244
318

Bikaner ('\forth) Sub· DI't"Is i01l

4

Total

(}

Hllral
Urban

5

7
:';

9

11,158
J,178

3[i,34!~

lfiS

Bika~~r (South) Sub· Vh·i.<tQll

18
19
20
21
22

23
24-

25
26

Total

Rural
Urban

Kola.yat (Magra) TehsHTotal
Rural
Urban
Nokha 'J'0hsilTotal
Rural
Urban

1";'0
:~] '2

~ ~fi

!J82

87

Local 'KA'Iniirmities
Explaflaforl'

Vate:-There is only one local table ("')

whlch ",hows the number of persons afflicted by the infirmities na1nely

deaf-lulltlsrn. insanity, blindn'388 and corrosive leprosy by age groups.
TOT

Deaf-Mute

Blind
r-------_;..,_------~

1
2

Bikanel' District Total
Bikaoer District Rural

:-1

Bikaner(Xorth)K. D. R.
Bikaner (:-;outh) t-i. D. R.

-+
5

Bikaner District Urban

7

Blknll"" Dist. 1 '. C\'. C.
Rlk".uer Cit.y

t,

.,-----'._~---........_

M ales

Females

Males

(2)

(3)

(4)

(0)

724
315

386

170

338

253

( 1)

114

108

216

41
175

341

52

42

93
193
27

61
150

Males

Females

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(ll)

(n)

250
104

59
27

52

33
11

17
11

3
2

38
66

57
29
6
23

4
7

11

23

14
]3
32
6

123

'27

146

32
118

166

Males Females

28
10
18

24
3

4

1

21

24

21

AGE-O

Blind

Males Females

22

28

6

2
1

6

1

AGE 1-4

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ .A. _ _ _ _ _ __

DeafMute

Leper

Insane

, - - - - - j,._---~ r - - - . . A - - - ~ ,.----"-+----.

Females

103

145

62

201
409
68

L

, - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - " - - - - - - - - - - - - ----_._- --.,

TOT AL INFIRMITIES

Persons

_"

.A. _ _ __

Insane

Leper

Blind

Insane

Dea f-l\l ute

Leper

F.

M.

F.

M.

F.

M.

F.

M.

F.

?I.

F.

l\L

F.

M.

F.

(H)

(15)

(I6)

(17)

(18)

(19)

(20)

(:!1)

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

(28)

Bikaner District Total
Bikaner District Rural

1

3
3
1

1
1

1
1

2

1

o

Bikaner District Urban
BikamlI' Di~t. U. ;'\. C.

1

1

5

7

Hlkaner C,ty

1

(1)

1
2

<>
-1

(13)

B,kaner (North) 1"i. D. n.
B,\.;:aner (~outh :-;. D. I{.

AGE 5-11

AGE 10-14

, . . - - - - - - - - - - ----- - - - - _ . _ - - - - - - - ,

,------------_).._------------.,

Blind

Deaf-MQte

Insane

Blind

Leper

Leper
,----_,.._--~

F

1
2
:-:1
4

5

o
7

F.

M.

F.

M.

F

M.

(34)

([6)

(30)

(37)

(1)

(211)

(W)

(31 )

(32)

{33)

Bikaner District Total
Blkaner District Rural

13
7

4
1

5

2

3
3

2

5
2

6
4
3

1

1

6

3

2

1

.,
..,

HikHner (~ort}I):-;. V. R.
Bikaner (8outh)S. D. B.

Bikaner Di'ltrict Urban
BikanerDi"t. t· X. c.
BikHIl' r ' it y

1)

1
1

1
1

2
1

r--....J----...

F.

]\1.

F.

:U.

F.

(39)

(40)

(41)

(4;Z)

(43;

(44)

12

'7

4
2
2
8

2

4

"1
2

4
1

4
4

1
3

4

F.

2
1

~

]

1

5

2

5
1

2

5

4

5

2

3

AGE 15-24

---------...,

----~----------------_)..ln~anC'"

Dc<tf-1H n te

Blind

Leper

, . . -_ _ _ _ _.A._ _ _ _ _ --."

Fenlule3
( 1)

( 45)

1
2

Blk'lner District Total
Bikaner District Ru:e,;l

36

16

Bik~"c .. (~"rt h) c~. ] l.

I

H.
BllGtJlE'I' (:->nllti, J:->. D. H.

4
12

3

5

Blk.lner Di'itrict Urban

20

9

17

9

1)[ t. r. X. ('.

Ii

ni'~"ll('r

7

h Il,cHlt' r C, t Y

.49)

(4'1)

14
5

12

~"I lies

, - _ _ _ _ -_A._ _ _ _ _ - - ,

Ferua168

.!\laIes

Females

(50)

(f> 1 I

(52)

3

2
1

7

6
2

9
2

4

2

1
1

5

4

7

3

1
1

1

]

2

4

3

fj

1
2

1

o

88

Local.:KA' Infirmities-(Oontd.)
AGE

25-34

_ _ _ _ _.J-,___ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _- - - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

0

Admi nistrative Unit

Z
-.;
.;::
'l)
w

1
2
3
4

5
6

7

Blind

Dcaf.Mute

Leper

Insane

r------.---,

,-----"----_....,._

r-----...}.._----."

, -_ _ _ .A-_ _ _ '""I

Males

Males

Females

:Males

Females

Males

FeUlales
(60)

Females

(1)

(53)

(54)

t 55 )

(56'

f(7)

(58)

(59)

Bikaner District Total
Bikaner District Rural
Bika.ner (North) S. D. R.
Bikaner (South) S. D. R.
Bikaner District Urban
Bikaner Diet. U. N. C.
Bikaner City

15

10

9
6

18
12

10

12

2

5

6

1
4

1

6

1
1]

3

6

5

5
6

4-

1
4-

6

4

?
2

1
3

fi

8
2

6

6

5

1

~

3

...

1
1
1
A

1

AGE 35-44

r - - - - - - . - - - - - -______________ -A.. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
Blind

Deaf-Mute

Adminietrati V0 Unit

C
Z
til
.;::

r - - - - -- ___ ...,J\._ --~-- - - - - . ,

4c

5
6
7

__ _

Males

Females

.M ales

(1)

(61)

(62)

(63)

Bikaner District Total
Bikaner District Rural
Bikaner (North) S. D. R.
Bikaner (South) 1:>. D. R.
Bikaner District Urban
Blkaner Diet. U. N. C.
Rikaner City

15

10

9
3
3

4)

w

1
!l
3

.--

_-

4

7

2
2

2

5
3
1

t1
2
9

Leller

Insanp

.A.._. _

__

,----- - _ _ A . - - - - - - - l

--,

, - _ _ - _ A _ - _ - --.,

Males

Females

l\f ales

Female!-

(64)

(65)

(66)

(07)

(68)

2
2

7
5

3
1

1

1

1

2

:l
3

2

2

1

:2

.J

1

]!'em

les

6

].

~

2

4

Aca: 45-54
. - -_ _ _ _ _ _ _

Blind
r - - - - - --'------- --,

1
2
3

Eika.uer District Total
B'kaner District Rural
Bika• .,r (North) S. D. R.

<1

Bikan<er (South) S. D. R.

5'
6
7

Bikaner District Urban
Bikan6r Di"'t. F. N. ('.
Bikaner Cit.y

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ .....A-_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - - - - - - - - - _

Deaf-Mute

Arlminil!ltratin' Unit

(1)

~

Insane

r - - - - _.A.. - - - - . . . . . . . ,

r - - - - - - o.A.. ___ - - - -

.r---~-- - - " - _ - - - - .

l\f a IE'S

MalE'S

FemalE'S

Maleg

Females

(69)

(70)

(71)

(72)

(73)

(74)

(7f) )

25

29
10

6

7
4

6
3

5
1

1

1
I

::2

1

.,

1

3

3

4

1

.,...

:l

4

1

4
2
2

3

..""

7

21

19

4-

1

5
1

17

18

4

J\lalE's

FE'll1.a Ie,;

Female:;
(76)

_ _ _ _ _ _ _)o~_

A<lll1i ni"tratiYe Unit

Blind

D"af~]',lnie

Ins"ne

r-----.A.------.,

,..--------"------....,

, - - - - - - - - " - - - - - -- ~,

r------ _-- _ _ , A _ _ - - -~.

l'I-Illies

Females

Male~

Female"

:Male3

Ii'emales

]l.lu I""

(1 )

(77)

(7$)

(7H)

(f;O)

(;'!])

(St l

(;..3,

1
2
3

Bikaner District Total
Bikaner District Rural
Bikaner (North) R. D. R.

50
18

79
37

7

13

2

21

10

4

Uika·ner (South) S. D. R.

8

10
27

5
2

9

3

4

f)

7

Bikaner Cit.\'

5
27

4

6

Bikaner District Urban
Bikaner Dist. U. N. C.

42

~

5

32

~

4

3

4

33

3

9

I

2
2

1
1

::F"cll1a10A.

(~I )

89

Local "KA" Infirmities-( Concld.)

r------------------------Adnlinistrati v

Z

Unit,

~
....

r:;-------"-------, r-----.A.----,.--,

----~

Leper

Insane

Deaf-:Mut.u

Blind
u

--_A._---_r---,_,---- ________ - - - -

, - _ _ _ __,A.. _ _ _ _

~

r------"------

MaleR

Female"

Males

l·'ernales

MaleR

Females

Males

Females

(1)

(85)

(86)

(87)

(88)

(8U)

(90)

(91)

('12)

.1
2

Bikaner District Total
B'kaner District Rural

54

56

2

2

2

1

3
2

3

Blka!,er(North) S. D. R.
RikaneT (SonU,) S. D. R.
Bikaner District Urban
Bikaner DlSt.. U. N. C.
Riksner Cit.y

IJ

1

12
35

2

1

""

1;F,

4

5
6

7

30
]2
18

21

7

8

24

17

1

27

,-----------Z

~:!

1

1

1

I

1

75 AND UYER

Insane

Deaf. Mute

,-_---.A..-------,
Male>!

,J.;

1

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ .A. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

Blind

Administratiyo UIJit

2

1.

AGE

0

1

, -_ _ _ _ .A. _ _ _ _ _ _,

Felnaies

MaleR
(9;.)

Lepel'

,-----~----_,

!\h,]e"

:FenlaJes

(96)

Wi)

(}It-< )

1

3

l:reIllalt"~

r-----.A.----_,
Female"

(9H)

(I)

(n3)

(~-l-)

Bikaner District Total
Bik\Uler District Rural

a

35
11

3

2

4

Hikaner (North) p.. D.R.
Bikaner (Sout,b) S. D. R.

]0

5

Eikaner District Urban

19

24

3

1

3

1

6

Bikaner Dist. U. N. C.
Bikaner City

11

22

3

1

:3

1

1

3

7

12

......

8

2
1

9
2

2

(1 CO)

1

AOE NOT STATED
.A. _ _ _ _ _ _ _

r------------Administrativ... Unit

1

2
3

,-----"-----:-'1

,-----"------,

_ _ _ _ ..A.. _ _ _ _ _ ,

Fema.les

Males

Females

Males

Females

Males

Females

(1)

(101)

(102)

(103)

(104)

(100)

(1)6)

(107)

(108)

Bikaner District Total
Bikaner District Rural

1
1
1

4
4

Bikaner (North) S. D. R.

Bikl'.nor (South) S. D. R.
Bikaner District Urban
Elkaner Diet. U. N. C.

7

Bika.ner Cay

~

Leper
,

Males

6
6

4

,-----"------,

_______________

Insane

Deaf-Mute

Blind

~

4

...-

District Index of NOD-Agricultural Occupations

This Table is prepared from the ~orter'B Ticket 2. This is a sort of supplement to
Econom.ic Table B-111 and provides further details of the occupational groups mentioned
therein.
The Sorter's Tieket .") was prepared in accordanc(' with til('
reproduced below:-

iHstnlCtious to

t.he Sortors

1. Prepa'ration.-¥ou have to prepare Sorter's Ticket 2 only if you have slips relating
to any of th~ livelihood das:-; \"'", V r, VIT or VIII. You ar(' to d~al only those slips which relate
to self-supporting p('r80n:-;. The slips relating to non-earniug dependants OJ' earning dependants
"olllcl havE' bf'pn 8('parat('d already and should not be llsed at this "'t<tge.
2. First opcr<-1tl~on.-You have fiL'St tu deal the slip'-, with refAl.'enl't..' to the Principal
1l1.eans of livelihood re('onh'd against question 10. Your 8upervisol.' will ~ive you a list of ··~If/IA
(::YIeans of Livelihood) suh-groups"* in the order of im,pol'tance for whjch you have to sort.
SelBct not luorB than t.ell. Pigeon-holes <bud affix lalwls b(,arlllg tb,~ llalllOS of the "l\I/L subgroups" (written out in full) as gi ven to you. Thp nUmlWl' of lV[/L sub-groups giYcn to you
will generally exc('(.,d ten,
You should reFlerve one or two Pigeon-holes for throwing "llips which
are not covero(l hy the M/ L suh- grOlll'f; shov, n on the la LoIs. You ",honld thcll deal thl' slips
with l'Cfer(HICe to tho allS\YPl' recorded H,gain:-4 question 10.
In doj Ilg HO, pn 1, together slips
eontainin,g Nltrie8 whiph <\.1',· writ1('n ill ~~ither idcnticat or v,-,ry sinl11ar terln8 to etteh of the
Jabelled ~'MLL _sub-groups". If YOll an~ in doubt ,,-hether au ~ntly, ill any <>aso is very similar
or not to the labelled "ltfjL l'luIJ-grollps, consult the Supervisor. :FilliRh the sorting for OUf' set
of MIL Huh-groups. 'l'heullif:>tl'illHt.e the Rlip:o; of OlW set into lndiviuual oecupat.ions. Now
count thl'llUlllbel' and "I'ntl'r" the' nanl<,"' and numher jn ('011111111:-1 (2) and (3) of Sorter's
Ticket")
K.epp the ulll"orh·d :.dips :-;eparn,l ("
This (.'ompleh;s t.he fir,..;t ;:;.;ta,gc of the first. operation.

3, /"ir8t oPC)'(l(i011 (81lf.·('('('di'll:l stf{ye8).--You bhould tll£~)' lak(· 11» Ow t-5lipH that eenlain
to be sort(,d,
You Hhoul(\ Ill'oil thenl agaiu fot' the l'('ll1;1,irci,lg ?l1.,1. ~ull,c!"n}l'l't.; giv{',a to you in
sanie nHtlllW]" as in t.he filSt oporntion, The op(,rrl,liun" ,·;ill)uld be l'Cpc'i\,tf'd successively until
all t,he slipi'> an' sorl'uri for all the l\f/L Hul'-,SS'j'olq)f"; gin'n to YUll,
y()~;
n'n~:
find dips ,,,,here
t,he MIL as recorded j 11 qUl':-ltion 10 d Q('f', lHlt faU Ulltlt',· a,llY of till' cHi h-~!l'(iupS giv~'n to you.
)-ou should <leal thl'..;e :->!ip,", separatcl.\' in til" rllalJlHT e_xpIHin.',] allo\.{· ;l"d ()lltc·" 1,he nct1ne
and number in the fiori-vI";:'; Tir'ket,
'l'hiH {'{':npleiel'l the fin;:t {Jp,·raLiull.
You Hhould keep
f',{jparate the bundI(' for en,d"l MIL SUh-gl~(lUP,
4. 8pec,'ial1:tlstruct'ion8 reQanlil;;1 J/un-prnductivt; IJ/(Oll'i of 1;;-,lihunl.--I"iveJihood class
VILI "',Till contain slips of per~;ons who deTh~("~ their ineonlc ni herwis(' t.h:~L' through Productive
activity. Thc.v i11chl(k~ n-11 sdf-sUP1)Ortill,g PI'l'S()lIS i"gain:---t. who 11 1 ! i~" ;\J'!'HveI' to question 9,
Part: two. is '0'. 'i'hpy s~Julll<.1 1)0 t\_'eated 3K R. rlistind ,g:roup" lint ,',;\ \, gundel' any of the
prcsnribed divisions nIH.! snll-di\yiDiOL;";: 3.11d S!,:J.'i,E"C: under t.he fol:nv;, :' ~'lltl-gl'<il:iT'3, "'1'/:.'living prill cjp,dl~,­ (lil inn0111A f"()IH non-i),gl jc:dt.", ,';d p,·(,PCl't,y.
Persons liyjn'I princip,-'] 1,"- Oil pen:,;1ons, relnittu,nce::.;, s('!:o:::: .;[lips and fl "d~.
(,:q';) Tnn1'ties of jaib, asylums. aln1R h011.f-:el'l and ]'Pcip;pnt,., oj" do!(':~,
v" Urf1,l~ltR
(ir) J~('o'<fan;
-hCC
•<, 'ld
( ?; ) All nt :,(';' pe,'son'1
li\'ill!)'
il ,--,J' -pn)[~netive
,."
( i)

f

PE'rf~Ullb

'." \

\ 1, ;

~

.._-\<::--

0(".

~_.

~

:1.cti vitjos,
5, Sr;eu,,,d npe')'af.:,Jn.---_f.j{_;l'lhis ,)pt~l'aiin}l u~(' ..:,li]Js 11:l " j " i l ",t !;\ j':~L'~:'{'I,!l <~ :,UI.C exch:dLd.
You ha.ve to de:d the ren:lainill<J: slip-; \vith refnrenc(' to t1w 3.1i""\"('1
1'('c""d,,d Jl' the second
cornpartluent of (luestion !L 'A!Ii'X b 1Jcls to three Pigc')n-hr,l('", tlw 1:'1 ...1,.: h,·in~ ;_':nl'ked
-:" L;,_;/ ol.ll-I/L 8ItU-!Ii'uupa.--t)ej,;,t'at.,

li~t~ of ,.;11h-gl");'i,i d'nnld I", J)"('p.~r'id f'il' Ii_·,: ." ' .. >l;1. • eu.ch
'1'h,~p,n :ist.; "),,,\1',\ ',,,, ,'UTflp;ktl. <,1; ,u,,, \,,,,,:,;:' ..f (a)
th" N nt-ion:: i P"~ i ,tt-:,
"i' {'i I ; ,':('Il-< l. >, i ;1. 1 l'( ...·ui1.~ of

or th., f(,\\.1' different live\il)nnd l'Ia;-\l-'.cs'V
t,) \'IlI.
t;of'utini7in[( (If entries fOlU)' I tn fjeCUl' frCCHwllth' in
tl'jal sorth~g by SllP() rv i,.;m· a.nd (\'nlpikl'-<~lll:'f'k;r'c',

92
H~Jmployel"", "Employee" 11nd. "Independent worker".
Take the bundle for cad) .M/L suhgroup and deal thelll into the three Pigeon-holes. You win finn '~~l"
for "Employer", "~ ..
for "Enl.ploYL'o" a.nd "~'{" for ·'Ind.ependent worker" recorded in the second conlpurtmcnt ot
question 9. If yon find that there is no entry you - should take the Ol'dfr of your Supervisor.
\Vhen you have completed the sorting for a MjL sub-group's you should count the number in each
Pigeon-hole and enter in Columns (4) to (6) of the I:-·orter's Ticket according 38 tIl(> Pigeon-,
hole rolat('s to "EJnplo,Yer", "Employee" and "Independent worker" ,espf>ctive]y.

6, 8econd opn'aiion. (sur.cced·ing :.;tages).-You should take each of the other hundlpR for
MIL suh-groups and deal tlwnl in the ~anle Inanner as in the second operatiun; you should
enter the result in the relevant eohllll11S of the Sorter's Ticket.
7. Conclusion.-¥ou have no'V completed all operations necessary for Sorter's Ticket 2.
He-combine all tho Inale slips and all the female Fllips.
If you are sorting
SOl'tc'r's Ticket R.

sanlplo slips

or

slips for

diflplaucd persons you should proceed to

If you arc sorting general slips you should proeeed to Sorter's Ticket 6.

After the f:lorter compw.ted the ticket and after due check by the Compil.jr-checkcr
and the Supervisor, tlw Ticket waH handed over to the tabulation elerk to fill in the Group
Code numbeTs in coln nl1l (1) of t.he form of Rorter's Ticket 2 given llelow.-

Form of Sorter's Ticket 2

---------------------------- -------.------------------Group Code
Number
1

F'ull nam c of 'means of Uvelihood
(s1.lb-(j'rou,ps and occupations)

--------=--------_
2

Total

Employer

3

4

Employee
5

- --- ---- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Independent
worker
()

- - - - ---- ---

The group code numbers ·were adopted from the Indian Census Econonlic Cla,'Ssification
Scheme given in i>art II---B of the Report.

Accuracy of Figures
A perusal of this Index shows incredible figures, against certain occupations. This
is due to vague entries In the slips regarding the occupations ('ontrary to instructions ill
some cases and entries vdth correct details in others. The result was th at in the tabulation
stage tho only slips which contained correct details of occupations were sorted under the
correct sub-group an<l itH d.etails, while those with ya,Q:l.w entries were placed in the wider
groups.
Another point to be borne in mind is that not all persons following an occupation
have been shown against. it in the Index, but those who followed it as a Principal means of
livelihood. Thus if a Ti('ket Collector derived a greater part of his income from rent of
acyricultural
or other land or
building and some
income only fr(un his service aR Ticket Collector ,
0
he would not ue shown as Ticket Collector.
The third y:oint to be kept in wind is that these figllll';-', l'enresent only Hclf-supporting
persons and not th(,:,-(, , ..~ho are partly dependants. thus [1 young boy who sits at a 'Pall shop'
al d gets some pay from the shop-keeper wLich is not suffinif'll t to support him, he has to
depend upon his fath'C'r's income lllP:-.tly. Such a l11an ,,,"ould not, a.ppear under the occnpation
"SCl'vj(O on. Betel ~hop·'.
The last hl.1t H1IX.;t intpOI'·Cant ddc('t in tIle figlUCS is (hH_: to difference in the terminology
preya,lcnt in tte different area,s of H~)'Jgstban describing an oC(ollpation and also partly due to
""ant of exor('i~e of : 1'0, 01' care in n,,:, tahulati(Jn fOltage t,}w.t names ShO,.... 1U;': sa.ne and sjmilar
Of'Cllj"atlOlls havo 1.(W'l t,;bown as dirfu,c It OCG1.q,ftl,ions for oxanlplc "]{~:hn1i's Sh0P" and '''sweetl~le'i.t M(..:' :inr_;' , h<-, '. 0 ~ ecc, ,-,11. }-,dl af_;
cl: :.;~ 'o',t {. )(~('tqmtions,
In 01'1101' t1 :(>]'cf<)}'c f~O
find out the
get,;:d t mi~;;:1, (·i ,.,,':' '.- PP'Tti ~'.,:: ; n- , .-;f3 f:,llowin'~' a partknln.r o(""-,,,~ nl-,io:1. as their principal
nlec~ns or livuL!,,, .. ,L, i :~);~'lCD ,t,~c~c' q:',;, ,I,ll f;,!"h o'_'·,'uI1ation:'{ .',.hoHld ~lC totalled.
On 1..11, '" j ,,;f', j'<; Illii('x !C:l}:_,,'( ,; H~o cl',f"cts po~"t, d 011'1, ill i!")(: C{'1 1 RUS 'J'nblcs publisllOd
'n the plU",01,:~ (', i ; · l > ..1'[ t they (;(' i.(:t :.1;. Vi '>ctlHl.l n(:r'Pl'ntions but ihcir gl'OUpR on1y.

93

Index of Non-Agricultural Occupations
Persons deriving their income as principal means of livelihood from
occupation given in cohunn 3
Bik .. ~l~"l
C()d!~

S. No.

I2I'UlIl'

(~)

(1)

1

f.

--"- - --- ...,.,\_- -

NUlnhei' of

() '(,lljJ.,tional

1)1- 1,-[.

All Industries and Services

Tota.l of all Divisions

43.534

39.427

345

319

2

Division

o

PJ.'imary IndusLr1es not elsewhere specified

3

Sub-Division

(t.!

Stock Raising

324

299

4

Total Grou))

0'11

Herdsmen and shepherds

229

224

5

Group

229

224

6

Total Group

92

12

20

7

Gr . . Hlp

92

7'2

20

8

Total Gronp

0'10

Breeders and keepers of other large
transport animals

3

8

01'0111'

0' 10

C<.IiIC'l "reec1ing:

3

10 Sub-Division

0-3

Ph,ntatioll Industries

20

20

11

o·so

All other plantations but not including the cultivation of
special crops in conjunction with ordinary cultivation of
field Cl'OPS

20

20
20

9

Total Group

0-12

....

.. .

Breeders and keepers of cattle nnd buffaloes

animals inclnding

12

Uroup

0-30

1']anting and sowing ..

20

13

Sub-Division

0-4

Foresh-y and wood cutting

1

1

14

Total Group

0'44

Cow dung

1

1

Group

u'44

i. 'ow 'lung ~·,a.ke rnakC'l'r-;

16

DIvision

1

Mining and Quanying ..

723

716

..

I'?

Sub-Division

1'0

Non-metallic mining and quanying not otherwise classified-including mining and quarrynjg of such materials
as precious and semi-precious stones, asbestos, gypsum,
sulphur, aSj)halt. bitumen

32

30

2

--------do------

82

30

2

l:'roc·iou,., d O"('~ Inine ,"vol'k,'I''<

32

30

(ioal Mining-Mines primarily engaged in the extraction of
anthracite and of soft coals such as bitumenous and
legnite

1

1

Coal Mining

1

1

1

1

15

1S

Total Group

1-0

19

Group

1'0

20

Sab -Division

21

Total Group

1'1

22

Group

1'1

23 Sub-Divlsion

1-5

24

Total Group

1'5

25

Gruup

1'5

26

Sub -Division

1'6

27

Total Group

1'6

Group

1'6

29

Divi;:;ion

2

30

31

28

cake makers

1

stone-qnarrying, clay and sand pits

689

685

4

689

685

4

68()

685

4

Mica

1

1

Mica

1

1

------do----

1

P.:oces;ing and M9.IlUf,wtul'e--FooilstuUs Textiles. loathe"
anl products tl,er~of

2,899

2.443

456

Snb-Di.v:s!on

227

201

26

Total Group

44

42

2

4:0

183

159

280

248

4

3

::4

15!J

211

;,~:

!1:' ~

lU : . ;

~

!e""1

~'::

::·~e

£.n:]

O~J~(:f'..'

·: . jr:_<""ld~",' 'llf!ou"~ g!'i:nd~!':g

!H''(o;.O~·!f1

~ngagedin

1

94-

Index of Non...Agricultural Occupations-(Cont4.)
BikaneJ' Distric to
B.No.

(1)

37

Name of Ocoupaotion

Code Numbw of
Oooupational ~onp

Person",

(3)

(2)
GrQup

38

Total Group

39

Group

40

Total Group

2·11

(5)

(4)

~

Flour grlndiug

3

1

Millers of cereals and pulses

153

135

18

2-21

Flour luil]jng

153

)86

18

2'13

Grain parchers and makers of blended and prepared
flour and other cereal and pulse preparations

123

110

13

2'13

(.train pnrehers

123

110

13

Vegetable oil and dairy pl'oduct&

368

349

19

245

283

]jJ

233

12

123

116

7

123

116

7

2'12

42

Sub-Divis~on

43

Total Group

2'21

Vegetable oil pressers sud refiners

44

Group

2';?1

Oil pressing

45

Total Group

2'23

Makers of butter. cheese, Ghee and other dairy produots .-

46

Group

47

Sub·Division

2'4

BeverA.ges ..

10

10

48

Total Group

2'43

Ice manufacturers

10

10

40

GrOH p

50

Sub·Division

2'5

Tobacoo

11

9

2

5]

Total Group

2-51

Manufactllrel1lOt Bidis .•

11

9

2

Bidi lll.ukerr-

:1

I]

2

339

21'7

122

11

9

2

11

~

143

129

14

120

14

185

79

106

1,", ,.

7~

106

goods

687

626

81

Tailor.>. milliner:-, dr€:'C' m~k!"t;:"l, :ftnd darners

666

60lS

81

605

61

52

Gronp

10

~·Ill

53

Sub·Division

2'6

Cotton textiles

54

Total Group

2'61

Cotton ginning, cleaning ;;tud pressing

56

Total Group

57

\)rotlp

58

Tah) Group

2'63

60

Sub-Division

C)

61

63

Total Group

2-62

~

-

I

2'71

'

("otton spinning, siziug and wea'll3ug

Cotton dV<3ine:. ble:'lChillg. Ill'luting :;-repar.;.t.:"n &I.d. sponging

Wa~·ring n:;l:l:ll'el (Exce.)t tOOtw031'j ·'Ul.d m!l.dL-UIl

textile

M:.nufacture't'Boi hQ.')icry, embroiderer,., 1.':1;,.I'CI'5 of ~t'cpe
lace and itin&e:>

Total Group

84

..

8

8

:: 72

65

H\\t lll',kr.,·:; :-ud m,::kel'''l of other adic!~s of

text:l'-ii

Hor'1'

i ... oew

••j

2
2

61

'r()~al Grou"!)

2·70

Mct~t:er~~c~ t)~he'j~ In~'1n . . ~Jl) i?-~:tl1~gt)o":.1~

in'Shu1iul,; nnlhi"eJ-

hs
68

Or>! I"~

69

Slib Division

'«'0

Totl1.Z Group

11

11

II

1]

::wo

170

130

1

5

1
I~

t'l'On~1

74

(~n.)ll..)

75

Total G:oup

2'83

M~.n!lfaciureofl."ope, twme, string. :;mdotberl'Al~1.tedgood;;
iron1. (:o,~·_,- :rJ.u.~. alces 5t'raw. E:n:_ccc. and hr 1r •.

;,

5

292

167

125

16,

l25

95

Index of Non-Agricultural Occupations - (Con~d.)
Bikener Diet,riot
f~.

No.

Coda Num.ber of
Occupational group

(1)

~------_._---------'\

NamE" of Occupat,ion

FeuIales

(3)

(2)

(6)

(5)

(4 )

2

76

Group

2' 86

Be<lsted string spinner,.:

7.

Sub-Division

2'9

Leather, leather products and footwear

677

613

64

78

Total Group

2-91

Tanners and other workers in leather

145

142

3

145

142

523

462

61

462

61.

,g

Gronp

80

Total Group

2-92

Cobblers and all other makers, l'epairers, of boots, shoes.
sandals and clogs

Sl

Group

2'92

Leq,ther "hue nl.<lkels ••

82

Tota~ Group

2'90

Makers and repairers of all other leather products

9

83

Gronp

2'90

Leuth<"r wOlk

9

84

Division

3

Processing and manuiacture-Metals.
products thereof

85

Snb·Division

3'0

86

Total Group

87

chemicals

and

9

947

924

23

Manufacture of metal producb, otherwise unclassified

497

475

22

3 01

Blacksmiths and other workers in iron and makers of
implenlents

328

308

20

GIOUp

3 '0 L

Iron work

88

Total Group

3-02

Workers in Copper, brass and 1:ell metal

111

12

89

Oroup

3'02

Br.. i>s work

H

]2

90

Total Group

3'03

Workers in olher metals

8

8

~11

Group

3'03

Timwrs ..

92

Total Group

3-04

Cutlers, surgical and veterinary instrument makers

130

130

93

Group

3'04

Sikligari s

130

13u

94

Total Group

3-06

Makers of arms, guns. etc. jncluding workers in ordim'D('e
factories ••

17

17

~5

Ornul'

3'06

Arms roakers

17

17

96

Sub·Division

3-2

Non Ferrons metals (Basic manufactUl(,) Smelting and
refining, rolling, drawmg and alloymg d the manufacture of castings, forgings and other basic
forms
of Non ferrous, metals

32 •

32

..

2()

~Blttt'ksrIliths)

8

._

98

Sub-Division

33

Transport equipment

28

28

99

Total Group

3 32

Manufactul'e assembly and repair of Railwayequipml'nt,
motor vehicles and hicYcles and Loco workshop

2S

28

100

Group

3'32

Rieycle repairers

28

28

101

Sub·Division

3'4

Electric MachinerY, apparatuS. appliances and suppl!es

55

54

1

102

Total Group

3'40

Manufacture of electr;cal generating, transmi~sicn. £nd
distribution apparatus; electrical household applhmces
other than lights and fans: electrical equipment for
motor vehicles: aircraft and railway locomotlves and
cars; Communic.'.tion equirment and related products.
including radios, phonographs electric batteries X-r~ y
and therapeutic apparatus: electronic tutes, etc_

55

54

1

55

54

1

265

265

103

Group

104

Sub-Division

105

Grollp

106

Sub·Division

lU7

Group

108
109
110

3'5

Machinery (other than eledrical ma<,hinery) inclUding
Engineering Workshops
•_

265
3-7

Medical and Pharmaceutical preparations

2

2

Sub-Division

3'S

Manuiactule of chemical products otherwi!'e nnclass lied

6S

68

Total Group

3-8l

Manufacture of perfumes,
preparations

4

4

Group

S-81

Perfumer'Y

Cosmetic and otl!er toilet

96

Index of Non-Agricultural Occupations-(Oontd.)
Bikaner Dif'trict,
I::l. No.

, - - - - - _ _ _..A--. _ _ _ _ _ _ - .

l'iaIlle of Occupatio >11

Code Kamber or

0""" p,.tional g l 0 up
Persons
(2)

(1)

(4)

(3)

111

Total Group

3'82,

Soaps and other washing and cleaning compounds

112

Cl-roHI'

;;'8::

\\'0' kers in S,'ap factory

113

Total Group

3 83

Paints, varlllshes, and lacquers and polishes

114

Females

(0)

(6)

4
4

G"Ollp

~

3'86

Males

..

Candle

59

59

6\1

5H

1

1

115

Total Group

116

UrDu!'

117

Division

4

Prooess;ng and mf!llUfacture-Not elsewhere specif,ed

118

Sub-Division

4'0

M lnuhcturing

i~dnstries otherwise unclassified

533

500

119

Total Group

4'03

Repair and manufacture of watches and clocks

1

1

121

Tot;11 Group

4 '04

Wor'kers in precious stones, precious metals and makers of
Jewellery and :JITlo,ments
,,

498

484

122

n rOUp

'" -u{

(:, :Id nnci 'i, h

4tJ8

484

123

Tor.al Group

4'00

Other miscellaneous manufa ctu:ring industries. including
t.one. ivory, horn, shell. etc.
,.

34

15

19

124

Group

4'1:0

Bung1C'llHtkers

34

15

19

125

Sub-Division

4 '1

Products of petr()leum a 11.d coal

1

1

126

Total GlOUP

4'11

Kerosene and petroleum refiners

1

1

4'11

Pet .. ol works

1

1

128

1

129

G-J'OIlP

130

Sub-Division

,'" ornaments makers

Bricks, tHes, and other structural clay pw£lucts

Sub-D:vision

Cemellt-·Cement pipes and other Cement products
4'"

,

1,855

168
33

14

210

194

16

210

HIe!

16

13

13

(]mnen 1 goods manufu('1 urers

1:~

Non-metallic mineral products

351

]:\

109

132

Sub Division

133

Tut..l Group

4 41

Potter3 end mfl.kel's of e"rthenware

341

236

105

134

Grol1p

4'41

Potters

341

236

l().)

135

Tot:l.l Gro.1p

4'44

Makers of other ~lil.sS and cl'ystalware

2

2

136

(~ruul'

137

Total Group

4-40

Makus of
products

8

4

4

VI8

l}r- H'P

8

4-

oJ

..

other

miscellaneous

non-metallic

minilral

,..

139 Sub Division

4-6

Wood :.lnd wood products other than furniture and fixtures

715

708

140

Total Group

4'62

Carpenters, turners, and joiners

600

594

]41

Oroup

'1-62

,Yo >,len work

14:.!

Croup

4'02

C 'rren~crs. _

143

Total Group

4 '64

Basket makers

112

111

1

4 '64

SiJ'ki W01 k

112

111

J

4'60

Other industries of woody materials. including leaves, but
not including
furniture
or fixtures
,
,

3

3

4'00

Leaf plato 'nakers

3

:3

47

Furniture and fixtures ..

5

4

2

\Voo,1<>11. fU'n,hu'e makr>rs

5

4

I

8

7

1

R

7

1

19

19

1404

145

GrOHl'

..,

Total Group

...
147

Sub-Division

14,S

Group

149

Sub Division

4'8

Paper and p3-per products

] 50

Group

4'8

l'a.per goods industry

151

Sub-Division

49

Pr·nt:ng and allied Industries

6

1

97

Index ot NOll-Agricultural Occupations-(Contd.)

r------~__..-------

Code Numb"" ot'

8, No.

O,·('uPationa.l group

-------- ----.

!\Ia1e '

152
153

(4)

(2)

(1)

Total Group

4'91

PI'inters, lithOgl'Ii}Jh€'l'S, engravel'S

C}roup

154

Total Group

155

Choup

4'92

(5)

(6)

12

12

12

12

Book-binders and Ftitchers

7
7

7

2,023

1,8'71

152
107

156 Division

Construction ancl utilities

157

Sub·Divi'Sion

Constructlon and maintenance

924

817

158

Total Group

Paintel's and decorators of house

17

17

:>'13

17

160

Total GToup

It,I

Urau!'

162

Sub D;vision

5'10

5'2

Other persons engaged in construction or maintenance of
buildings othe;:' than bu!ldings malle oJ: bamooo or
s;D.lllar nlaterials

COllstl'lH'tion and maintenance-Roads, Bridges and other
tUlnspo.t \yorks

Gr, .up

1,;4

GrollI'

165

Sa b ,Division

5'5

Works and Services-Electric and Gas supply

166

Total Group

5'51

Electric aupply

Uroup

168

Group

169

Sub-Division

170

C>roup

171

Sub-Division

]72

Clroup

173

Division

6

174

Sub-Division

6'0

1711

Gro"p

1,7

Total Group

17~

GrOllI'

179

Total Group

180

Grnup

181

Total Gronp

182
183

GroHI'

107

8UO

107

37

1

36

:~5

1

841

817

24

84'1

817

24

564

23

253

I

087

167

Total Group

38

800

2

163

175

907

5'51

E10etri(' Contrac,j,ol'"

_.

Works and Services-Domestic and Industrial waier supply

146

146
141:\

5'7

74

54

20

7-1

54

20

COlnm,erce. ,

12,153

11.624

529

Ret:J.il trade otherwise unclassified

3,080

S~nitary works and services including scavengers

-.,
6'01

Hawkecs and Street Vendors otherwise uncla.ssified

2.889

191

364

361

23

384

361

23
2

6'02

DeRlers in drugs and other chemical stores

()'.)

57

6-03

Publishers, booksellers and stationers

96

96

6'00

General store-keepers, shop-keepers and persons employed
iu shops otherwise unclassified

2,541

2.375

1.66

GeHeral,nc'I'chanls

1,236

1.118

)J:-{

122

] 10

12

ti'UO

Group

11

184

GrOHp

185

Ornu1'

71

67

18t)

Group

32

32

187

Group

1

188

CrollI'

4

I

.,

2

190

Group

fl' 00

Dealor'! in ROn,p" Pte

191

Granp

fi'OO

1:Jmbrcl'a sellers

H)::l

Grollp

6'00

Basket selIf'rs

..
r'

1

•
3

1

98

Index of Non-Agricultural Occupations (Contd.)
s. No.

Name of Occnpatiotl

Code Number of
Occupational group

~------~-------~
PerSOn"

(2)

(1)

(S)

Females

(6)

(5)

(4)

193

Group

6°00

Sped,aeles spllerb

]94

Group

6°00

Cate<·hu Rollers

19:')

Group

6°00

Dye gellerR

6

196

Group

6°00

COlllmis<;ion agents dhup

3

197

Group

6°00

Eart,j,Pll ves"el seller"

-_,
-,

19~

Males

2

2
1

6

3

58(1

580

Group

6°00

Shroffs

199

Group

6°00

General lnerehants

78

71:>

200

GI·OUp

6·00

Brass dealers

17

16

201

Group

6°00

Makr.:tna 11larhle d""ler,..

202

Group

203

U,rOLlp

20~

Gr,.:>up

:.!06

Grvup

6'00

Dealers in razor~

206

Group

6-00

Cement (lea.lerQ

207

Group

1)-0 U

Slate shop

1

1

20~

Group

6'00

Envplope sellc-rs

3

3

209

Group

6- 00

Bangle 8011er8

3

3

210

Group

2Il

GrOup

6 00

()Jonalnpot ",ell .. l.,-

212

Group

6'00

Dealel's in timber

213

Group

6°00

Utensil ",ellers

214

Sub-Division

6_1

215

Total Group

6-11

1

1

1
8

6'00

Bricks dedler."

3

3

1

1
1,

1
2

10

78
216

216

27

25

Retail trade in foodstuffs including beverages and
marcoIics

5,406

6,236

Retail dealers in grain and pnlses, sweetmeats. sugar and
splces. dairy products; eggs and ponltry. animals for
food, fodder for animals, other foodstuffs, vegetables and
fruits

5,267

5,098

] 54

]27

170·

_,

')-

216

(Cfroup

6°11

MIlk and ('urd sellers

217

Group

6°11

Grain merchants

1

218

Group

6-11

Sugar and gur sellers

8

219

Group

6-1l

Kirana. ml'rC'l.nnt"

220

Group

6 ]1

Fruits sellers

48

48

221

Group

6'11

Vpgetable seller"

374

317

::!22

Group

G'll

Parched gr",rn and ground nllt selI .. rs.

223

Group

6°11

Pro,-ision d.._·alel· '"

8

224

Group

6°11

GlIee and oil .'o",llers

229

225

Group

6°11

Biscuit shops

8

226

Group

0'11

~alt and chillies ""lIer"

1

227

Group

6-11

Grass and lUl'ern sell"r",

4

228

Group

6-11

Toffy", ,llc'rs

4

229

Group

6°11

Pakodi ",?llf'l"

2:{0

(;roup

~31

Group

0

1

8
6Z

2,832

3

_.

q

6°11

SWt'pt,meat sell,"1"~

164

6-11

Trade in gN,in

7 -,
"-

oj

99

Index of Non-Agricultural Occupations - (Cc"ntd.)
Bikaner Distr;('t
~alne

Code Number of
Oooupational groHp

of Ocpupo.tion

r--------_.--------~

Females

PerSon«

(1)

(3)

(2)

2SS

uron)'

234

GrollI'

~.35

Group

6'11

(6)

(.J.)

Hawkel'sValSew

3
5

1:>' 11

DElaler!'! in soltish ('ondilnents

ILl

11:l

3
237

Group

:!Slt

Group

2

2

488

2

:!39

Group

240

OrOltp

{i· It

Bidi ll~ercl".nt"

241

Total Group

.'12

:li2

Groul'

G'12

243

Group

24'

Total Group

2-'5

Grollp

:;:46

Group

6'1:~

OVluIn {·ont.ractor"

241

Sllb-DiTisioa

6'2

Retail trade in fuel (including penol)

US

Total Group

6'20

Retail dealeu (including hawkers and street vendors' in
firewood charcoal. coal. cowdung and all other fuel
except petroleum

26

16

Vendors of wine. liquors. aerated waters and ice in shops

3

:l

I.i'l uor contractors

I

10

2

6'13

6'20

Retail dealers in tobacco. opiuDl and ganja

135

1

131

1

100

71

ell

100

71

29

1

1

13S

Keros('n.· oil '<hop

1

1
fL:!o

Fiw\"wood 8elll".· ...

95

252

C:roup

ri·:.!"

Pet.ot .1ealel· ...

253

Sub-Division

6'3

Retail trade in textile and leather goods. Retail trade
(lUcluding hawkt'rJ aud street vendors) in piece goods.
wool, cotton, silk. hair. wearing apparel. made-up textile
goods. skin. le:1 thet. furs. feathers etc.

2 ..... 4

'~1·011p

I )e.dor_, in leathol

:lil;;

Gran}>

Dealers ill wool

2.)6

Group

(·Iot.h dealt'rs

2.'>7

Group

258

Group

259

Group

260

G.-oup

6 :~

261

Group

( "

2<:i2

Group

263

Sub-Division

:264

GrOllI'

265

Grollp

26,6

Sub-Division

267

nrn"p

268

0 rOUI'

(t';)

:.!(lU

Grolli'>

t)-,)

270

Oro""

:~

2.766

2.714

41

+l

21'

...

'11
~.416

••
Ready mad" eloth ~hops

..

61

34.

4

1

10

2

Cotton yal'n 8eller~

..,

Gunny hags doalerd

OJ

.J llt.e den Ie .....

."
6'4

Wholesale trade in foodstuff - wholesale dealers HI
grains and pulses. sweet-meats. sugar and spices, dairy
products, eggs a.nd poultry. animal for food, fodder for
animals, other foodstuffs, wholesale dealers in tobacco.
opium and gallja

.,

]."1\1

1 !'if;

.>

79

73

6

.,
Wholes~le

trade in commodities Olher

than foodstuffs

52

46

6

100

Index of Non-Agricultural Occupations-( 00 n td.)
s. No.

, - - , _ _ : . ._ _ _ ..".A_ _ _ _ _ _ _

Uode Number of
Occupa,tional group

Per~ons

(1)

1\1,,1es

(4)

\:!)

Group

ti'.)

"-b ole "a Ie dealor;; in pat",,,"

273

Group

6-{)

'vYholesale deal,'1''; in jllte

274

Uroup

1)';;

\VhoTe'laI0 dealt.,.", in t,onacco

20

27!)

Group

6'3

\Vltol<'sule deale." III <"ioth

3

276

Sub-Division

6'8

Money lending. banking and other financial business

277

Uronp

U'S

nIone,\

:278

(~rotlp

279

Group

H'S

Bank en.1ploY"B~

280

GrollJ'

t)

281

Division

282

Sub Division

680

lending

(t)}

2(1

595
433

16

107

107

2.650

.2,591

59

Transport by road---owners, n~anagers, and employees
connected with machanically driven or other vehicles
I excluding domestic servant) !lalki etc., bearers of owners
pack elephant Camel, muble. ass and bullock owners
and drivel'S, porters
and messengers,
persons
engaged in road transport not otherwise classified.
including freight transport by road. the operation of fized
facilities for road transport such as toll roads. highway
bridges. terminals. and parking facilities

973

919

54

7'1

Aroto,' drivers

141

136

.5

7'1

2Huloice'R ••

37

8

Bl'okf'l'uge •.

'7 'I

283

(froup

284

C,'oup

285

Group

171

ltifi

286

({ranI'

1;)

}.-,

Tongf~ drivers<

324

324-

IS4

17S
!!l

..

32

287

Groltp

.288

Group

7'1

Bullock ('art drlyprH

289

Gronp

7'1

Thela d.ri~Ter'"

~I

290

Group

7'1

Employees'in Motor garage

51

2~n

Gron1'

,-1

Porters

292

Group

293

Group

7'1

EmpToye<,g of .l\'["tor ARgoei" tion

4

294 Sub-Division

'7'2

Transport by water-Owners and employees, officers,
mariners, etc. of ships plYing On the high sea.B, shillS
and boats plying on inland and coastal waters, peraons
employed in harbours, docks, rivers
and canals.
including pilots, ship brokers

10

10

IU

10

235

85

1',;

Transport, storage and communications

,

~

!

7'1

Group

6

..

,

18

296 Sub-Division

7 '4

Railway TranSPort

1,684:

1,&81

3

297 Total Group

7'41

Railway employees of all kiads except those employed on
construction works

1,585

~,683

2

) .3';3

298

(leonp

,'4 I

BIlll'Ioyee8 in nil ilway

299

G.'Olli>

7'41

Station Jl.faster,;

300

Group

,'4]

Hailway point" llH"n

30'2

U]'oup

7'41

Railway clerk"

7'41

R",ilw3,y .rn.111ad"I'S

7-41

n.uihva.yfittpl'''

7 '41

Ho.ih\'<.I.)' Engine driver",

1

8

26

~1

81

(3

6

1

GrollI'

B05

Grot! f'

1

306

Group

37

307

Total Group

308

Uroup

Porters

1

1

;;(.)i

7 '42

1

31

31

19

18

15

H

1
1

101

Index of Non-Agricultural Occupations--(Colltd.)
Hikaller

-.---_.,.._---------~

Cod..: Xllrnbor of

-:>, "'{o,

Dist,rict

OC(>I1P" tin"" 1 group

.'lOg

(; r011p

310

Sub-Divisjon

811
3I~

313

<1

';' -6

Postal Services

UIOUP

Group

7·t_i

l'o~tl11ell

Sub-Division

7 '8

Telephone Services

315 Sub-Division

(ti,

I -I)

(:! )

( )

,.g

4

'6

73

2

46

44

2

2lJ

Wheless set:v<ces

7

'7

7

7

1

1
I

317 Division
318

Sub-Division

8
S'l

8,678

1,711

867

Medical and othet' Health Services

939

723

216

25

9
9

Health, Education and Pu blic Admiuistration

Total GI'OUP

8 '11

Registered Medical practitioners

34

(:r'oup

"'11

Doctor"

31

28

321

Total Group

8'12

Vaids, Haki.ms and other pel'sons practising medicine
withont being registered

95

95

322

Gronp

323

Total Group

324

UroHp

325

Total Group

8'14

Midwives

1'7

Group

8 '14

::\li,lwives

17

327

Total Group

8 '15

Vaccinators

5

6

328

(;'roup

329

Total Group

S'16

C:ompounders

123

87

330

Group

S'16

Compound,"''''

87

87

331

U roup

319
320

32G

332 Total Group

~l33

Group

334

Groul)

95
8'13

Dentits

8'10

All other persons employed in Hospitals or othel' public
01' private establishments rendering medical or othel'
health services; but not including scavengers or other
sanitary stalf

S'10

Eml'lo:-:",',_ in Phal'mfl('Y

GrOllI'

S'10

.l-~mployec"

336

Sub-Division

8'2

Educational Services and Research

337

Total Group

8'21

in Publi(' Health Df>pal'tl!lf'lll

Professors, lecturers, teachers and research workers
employed -n Universities. Colleges and Research
Institutes

663

3!l)

Group

341

Total Group

342

C~rt)11p

34-3

C;-ruup

17

36

8'22

8'2

All other professors, lechul'rs and teachers ..

Managers. clerks and servants of educational and research
iu~titutlOns including libraries and Inuseums etc_

&09

154

4H3

1<13

4

. J7

1~

5

1.231

1.100

131

47

4'

4,
Total Group

17

36

3:~5

339

2

2

409

776

47
344

65

344

6f)

70!?

86

1

1

46

:..:
IH

19

3t5

Uroul'

346

(}ro "l'

84

Grolll'

31

347

1 'J

102
Index of Non-Agricultural Occupations - ( Oontd.)
Blkaner District.

S.No.

Cod. Number of
Oooupationa,l group

(l)

:Na.rne of Occup&.t ion

(2\

(3)

r-------..A-------_,.
PUr8'ons

Males

Female.

(4,)

(5)

(6

348 Sub-Divis:lon

8-4

Police (oUler than village watchmen)

IHO

906

345)

Orcup

S-4

En~plo.yees

910

906

police Depari;mellt

350 Sub-DiYillion

8'5

Village officers and servauts including village watchmen

14

11

3

851

Group

S'5

\Y",tchn,en

10

9

1

3~2

GI'OUP

8'·'

Yillage SehhaB

2

s

358

Sub-DivmOJl

8'6

Employees of Municipalities and Local Boards (but not
including persons classifiable under any other division

1,053

801

451

35{

Gruul'

1,008

ti01

45.2

2,903

2.843

80

or Sub-diTision)

355 Sull-Din.ion
366

8'7

Employees of State Governments (but not
inclodin&
persons classifiable under any division or Sub-division). -

Group

6

857

Grollp

358

Group

359

(~rol1p

360

Group

2

361

Group

362

Group

868

Grollp

~'7

F:lnploye8H in P. 'Yo D.

36.

Group

P.·7

Eruploye ..", in f:pst Hou>!t'

8',

C10llll('rfO (Fn1'l'''9he8)

ti

2.379

55

12

1]

1

In

19

4.
4

4

3

3
4

365

Group

366

Group

367

Group

68

Oro IIp

369

Group

370

Group

8'7

ObserYetor-

371

Group

8'7

En'l']o,\eeo-! in Trelt"u,'Y l)el'attm<ent

372

Group

8'7

QOVCrI:llllont

373

Group

8,7

PatwAris

8'7" Sub-DIYision

8'8

375

Group

376

2

2

{)

tS

1

..
1

2
~l

21

4

'!I',r,-ic ..

369

309

Employees of the Union Government (but not includinc
persons classifiable under any division or Sub-division

1.528

1.527

1

S'S

Employ('O" of GOyel'Dment of India

1.,,06

1,505

1

Group

f:'8

Employf"~'" in. Cent"",l

Cust(HllS _,

21

21

377

Group

g's

Employe<:" in Con'" II" DC'partm<'nt

1

1

3'78

Dlrision

11.861

11,541

1.BBO

3,756

3.088

668

1.;~

18

14a

4B

46

9' Services nol, elsewhere specified

379 Sub-Di'risioD
3s0

Group

9'0

\YatrhlnC'1l _ .

3~1

Group

gO

-\strolof!r>1'-<

382

GronI'

g·o

LRhonr('l'~

383

Chonp

g'O

('itygnide-

;;.114g

491

3

385

Sub .Division

0·1

Domectic Services (but uot inclltJ_ng servicesrendel'ed by
members 01 faulily house-holds to one anotherl

38ti

Total GrouP

9'11

Private motol" dIlvers &

387

GrOllI'

388

Total Group

9'12

Cooks

cleaners

..

~

37

435

4,849

3.946

lOD

109

lU~1

lOB

273

78

903

195

103

Index of Non-Agricultural Occupations-((J())u'lrl.}
t ~·t...n l)Pl
('1)<1"

:,\,,,",,,'1' ot

r---~-

J )j"..d t It'l

_____ ..A._
-

~

----,

Ue011pntitnl<l) ~1'Ollp

F ' ''-'"1')l;,lt'''

( 1)

390

... )

I:!)

I">

~

Total G 'oup

84

9 13

Gardeners

!l' 1:{

G <tI'( lenpr"

9'10

Other domestic sPI'vices

80

4.383

3,679

Tohl Group

3UJ

(}roHp

;~,li13

."-J91

(_}rnnp

30

395

Sub·Division

Barbers and beauty shops, Barbel's. hairdressers and wigmakers. tatooers. shampooers. batIl llOuses

532

Laundries and Laundry services,Laundlies nn!l
services, washing and cleaning

Sub-Di vision

506

,04

26

506

BtlrLel'S

397

4

8U

392

I'

L

laundry
245

220

34

6

113

~.-,

25

399

Sub Division

9'4

Hotels. re"t>'.urallts and eating houses

40

9''''

FJnp]o}'(','''' 1n

II 01 p1

40

9'5

Recreation Services·Production and d.stdbution or nlotion
picture::: and the operation of cinemas and allied services,
managers and employees of theatres, opera cOlupanies
etc, musicians,actors, dancers. etc" Conjurers, acrobats
reciters> exhibit()~s of curiosities ~ nd wild animals. radio
broadcasting studios

401

Sub-Division

597

484

-102

Clrnup

Illj

114

40::;

('1"OUP

.Jt>1

:,70

Jll

404

Sub-DivisIOn

9'6

Legal and bus mess sel'vices

115

113

2

405

Total Group

9'61

Lawyers of all kinds including qazis, law agents and
mukhtian

89

88

1

89
407

T.:>tal Group

9'62

Clerks or lawyers, petitioll writers etc

3

3

;~

409

Total G.oup

9'63

Architects, Surveyors. EngiIleers and their employees (not
being state sel'vants)

1

1

.flO

(:)'OlIP

\)'6:~

Engineer", .

411

Tot"l Group

9'64

Public scribes. Stenographers, Accouutants, AudItors

-11~

r~t'nnp

413

Toial Gronp

... 14

{., 0111'

415

Sub-Division

9'7

Arts, letten~ and journalism

23

23

416

Total Group

9'72

Authors, editors. journal1sts and poets

1

1

-1-17

(~rnnp

418

Total Group

9'73

Photographers

22

41H

nroUp

H'73

Pho! ogrnpi1ers

22

420

Sub-DlVision

9'8

Religious, charibble and welfare services

421

Total Group

9'81

Priests" Ministers,

9 65

Managers, clerks, servants
and employees of Trade
Associations, Chamber~ of Commercial Board 01 Trade.
Labour Organisations and similar organisations or
employers and employees,

(Jr01lp

41!4

Total Group

, .,-

'-:I-_,_)

(}['oup

18

IX

1.-:

4

4
-1-

1

Monks, Nuns, Sadhus.

9'83

U'1:!3

Managers and employees of organisations and institutions
rendering charitable and other welfare services
~Prvant,,, iJll~e1ig'ioll'" Socicti .. "

"

22

1.204

1,127'

77

926

855

71

!)lO

8an

71

Hi

11i

278

272

Religious

mendicants, and other religious workers

.123

18

278

6
(;

