OCR text extracts (archive.org djvu.txt) around mentions of Mahajan Field Firing Range. OCR errors are frequent; check page images.
SOURCE: https://archive.org/details/eparlib.nic.in.65182

----- [char 26169-29883] last page marker before: ?
 of Arjun 
MBT Mk-Il should be resolved at the earliest and the Army be equipped with a world 
class product.’ 


The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:- 


Development of Arjun MBT Mk-Il 


Arjun MBT Mk-Il has been developed with 73 mutually agreed tank-fittable 
improvements out of which 15 are major tank-fittable improvements. Configuration of 
Arjun MBT Mk-II incorporating the mutually agreed improvements with weight has been 
deliberated in many Arjun Core Committee meetings constituted by Secretary (DP), 
which comprises all stakeholders. All the above improvements resulted in the additional 
weight of 6 t over and above Arjun MBT Mk-I. 


Agility, Mobility, Functional and Performance of Arjun MBT Mk-Il in Desert and 
Semi-Desert Terrains - During User Trials 


e Before commencement of the trials, the Arjun MBT Mk-Il has been weighed and 
taken for trials by Users. The performance of Arjun MBT Mk-Il with increased 
weight to 68.6 t is well proven during the various phases of User trials in terms of 
agility, mobility and other operational / functional aspects in the desert and semi- 
desert terrains. User conducted these numerous and extensive trials in Mahajan 
Field Firing Ranges, Pokhran Field Firing Ranges, rocky terrains around Jaisalmer 
and forward areas closure to Jaisalmer sector. 


e Based on the above User trials of Arjun MBT Mk-ll, User declared 67 
improvements as successful and ordered for DGQA and MET evaluation. It is 
planned to conduct User trials for the balance 3 improvements viz., missile firing 
demonstration and two related improvements by end 2018. 


e Arjun MBT ॥॥-॥ has exhibited the required performance in all aspects of agility, 
mobility and other operational/ functional parameters in the desert and semi-desert 
terrains during various phases of User trials as indicated above. 


Agility, Mobility, Functional and Performance of Arjun MBT Mk-Il in Developed and 
Semi-Developed Terrains — Operational Employability 


DRDO is confident that that Arjun MBT Mk-II will have requisite agility, mobility and 
other operational/functional parameters in various developed and semi developed 
terrains also. As directed by Hon’ble RM, DRDO requested Army for mobility 
comparative trials with the ‘Arjun MBT Mk-Il even with 68.6 ( along with Tank 1-90 
to prove its tactical and operational mobility aspects in all envisaged terrains 
(including developed and semi developed terrains) for its future employability. 
However, Army intimated that Arjun MBT Mk-Il and 190 are of different class& 
weight classification and their deployment is as per assigned operational roles. 
Arjun MBT has operational employment restrictions to specific sectors (desert/semi 
desert) being heavy tank. Therefore, Army intimated that the conduct of 
comparative mobility trials is not required. 


Trafficability and Transportability of Arjun MBT Mk-Il 


Arjun MBT Mk-Il is transportable by rail using the B-FAT wagons which are already 
in service. Road Transport of Arjun MBT Mk-II is possible through the 70 trailer 
being developed by Indian Army. 70 t Bridge Layer Tanks (such as BLT T-72 and 
Sarvatra) are available with which Arjun MBT ॥॥-॥ can cross an obstacle. 70 t 
Modular Bridge is also under development by DRDO. 


However, there may be a requirement to strengthen/upgrade culverts, civil bridges, 
etc. in strategic thrust areas at the developed and semi developed terrains by the 
GOI in consultation with Army to facilitate deployment of Arjun MBT Mk-II beyond 
the presently envisaged desert and semi-desert terrains. 


Status of QR Committee 


On the directions of Hon'ble RM, QR Committee comprising members from Army 
and D

----- [char 223810-227523] last page marker before: ?
nctional problems encountered in usage of Arjun MBT Mk-Il should be resolved 
at the earliest and the Army be equipped with a world class product. 


Reply of the Government 


Development of Arjun MBT Mk-Il 


Arjun MBT Mk-Il has been developed with 73 mutually agreed tank-fittable 
improvements out of which 15 are major tank-fittable improvements. Configuration of Arjun 
MBT Mk-Il incorporating the mutually agreed improvements with weight has been deliberated 
in many Arjun Core Committee meetings constituted by Secretary (DP), which comprises all 
stakeholders. All the above improvements resulted in the additional weight of 6 t over and 
above Arjun MBT Mk-I. 


Agility, Mobility, Functional and Performance of Arjun MBT Mk-ll in Desert and Semi- 
Desert Terrains - During User Trials 


e Before commencement of the trials, the Arjun MBT Mk-II has been weighed and taken for 
trials by Users. The performance of Arjun MBT Mk-lIl with increased weight to 68.6 t is 
well proven during the various phases of User trials in terms of agility, mobility and other 
operational / functional aspects in the desert and semi-desert terrains. User conducted 
these numerous and extensive trials in Mahajan Field Firing Ranges, Pokhran Field Firing 
Ranges, rocky terrains around Jaisalmer and forward areas closure to Jaisalmer sector. 


Based on the above User trials of Arjun MBT Mk-lIl, User declared 67 improvements as 
successful and ordered for DGQA and MET evaluation. It is planned to conduct User 
trials for the balance 3 improvements viz., missile firing demonstration and two related 
improvements by end 2018. 


Arjun MBT Mk-Il has exhibited the required performance in all aspects of agility, mobility 
and other operational/ functional parameters in the desert and semi-desert terrains during 
various phases of User trials as indicated above. 


Agility, Mobility, Functional and Performance of Arjun MBT Mk-ll in Developed and Semi- 
Developed Terrains — Operational Employability 


DRDO is confident that that Arjun MBT Mk-II will have requisite agility, mobility and other 
operational/functional parameters in various developed and semi developed terrains also. 
As directed by Hon’ble RM, DRDO requested Army for mobility comparative trials with the 
‘Arjun MBT Mk-Il even with 68.6 7 along with Tank 1-90 to prove its tactical and 
operational mobility aspects in all envisaged terrains (including developed and semi 
developed terrains) for its future employability. However, Army intimated that Arjun MBT 
Mk-II and 190 are of different class& weight classification and their deployment is as per 
assigned operational roles. Arjun MBT has operational employment restrictions to specific 
sectors (desert/semi desert) being heavy tank. Therefore, Army intimated that the conduct 
of comparative mobility trials is not required. 


Trafficability and Transportability of Arjun MBT Mk-Il 


Arjun MBT Mk-Il is transportable by rail using the B-FAT wagons which are already in 
service. Road Transport of Arjun MBT Mk-Il is possible through the 70 t trailer being 
developed by Indian Army. 70 t Bridge Layer Tanks (such as BLT T-72 and Sarvatra) are 
available with which Arjun MBT Mk-Il can cross an obstacle. 70 t Modular Bridge is also 
under development by DRDO. 


However, there may be a requirement to strengthen/upgrade culverts, civil bridges, etc. in 
strategic thrust areas at the developed and semi developed terrains by the GOI in 
consultation with Army to facilitate deployment of Arjun MBT Mk-Il beyond the presently 
envisaged desert and semi-desert terrains. 


Status of QR Committee 


On the directions of Hon'ble RM, QR Committee comprising members from Army and 
