OCR text extracts (archive.org djvu.txt) around mentions of Mahajan Field Firing Range. OCR errors are frequent; check page images.
SOURCE: https://archive.org/details/eparlib.nic.in.3707

----- [char 124392-129446] last page marker before: ?
 
serious allegations; 


(b) if so, the details thereof and the 
reasons for which th.y have been promot- 
ed; 


(०) the nutnber of three-star and _five- 
star hotels which were supplied water 
Without installation of any meter by the’ 
DNMC for construct on purposes with 
details of losses suffered, and 


which are using water without installation 
of any meter ? 


THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE4 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS (SHR 
CHINTAMANI PANIGRAH)) : (a) and 
(b) The information is being collected and 
will be laid on the Table of the House. 


(०) and (d). No hotel has been given 
water for the purpose of construction. One 
five star hotel under construction was 
found to be having a connection on which 
the meter was missing. The NDMC also 
did not bill that hotel for nearly thre: 
years, The detection was made in February 
1986 and the hotel was billed for the 
maximum water that the connection can 
carry during normal supply hours. The 
meter has since been provided to this 
connection, 


Evacuation of Mahajan Firi 
Villages ४०७०७ 
4540. SHRI MANPHOOL SINGH 
CHAUDHARY : Will the Minister of 
DEFENCE be pleased to state : 


87 Written Answers 


(a) whether 34 villages of Mahajan 
Firing Range have been evacuated; 


(b) whether compensation has been 
paid in respect of all these villages; 


(c) whether any of the villages have 
not taken compensation, if so, the reasons 
- therefor; 


(d) whether compensation for certain 
villages hasbeen withheld as the inhabi- 
tants of the villages had prepared wrong 
“Takhmina’”’ for compensation; 


{e) whether the Ministry have issued 
orders permitting the inhabitants of these 
villages to continue to stay there till 
*Kharif crop’; and 


(f) whether this stay order has affected 
those inhabitants who have already 
received the compensation and since 
evacuated the villages ? 


THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE 


DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
IN THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 


(SHRI ARUN SINGH): (a) Land and assets 
in 33 villages only are being acquired. Out 
of these land and assets in 29 villages have 
already been taken over and the viilages 
evacuated. In the remaining 4 villages the 
taking over and evacuation has been partial. 


(b) Compensation has been paid fully 
in 29 villages and partially in- 4. 


{c) Compensation will be disbursed 
fully and evacuation completed in the 
remaining 4 villages soon after the Kharif 
86 crop is harvested. 


{d) No, Sir. 


(०) Yes, Sir, Government had per- 
mitted villagers of Motalai and Raimalwali 
(Rena) to stay till the Kbarif 86 crop was 
harvested, as a special case, as they had 
already sown their Kharif crcp. The State 
Government have permitted the villagers of 
Motasar and Virmana also to stay on till 
xhe harvest of Kharif crop, as these villagers 
have got Jand/assets in above two 
villages and vice versa. 


DECEMBER 3, 1986 


Written Answers 88 


(f) No, Sir. 


[English] 


Tailoring of Black Cat Commandos 
Uniform by a Gwalior. Firm 


4541. SHRI INDRAJIT GUPTA : 
Will the Minister of HOME AFFAIRS be 
pleased to state : 


(a) whether order for tailoring uniform 
for Black Cat Commandos was placed with 


_ a tailor in Gwalior in 1986; 


{b) if so, the details; 


(c) whether this firm of tailors had 
done any tatléring of- uniforms 17 the 
past; 


(d) if so, the details; and 


(८) reasons and basis on which this 
tailoring firm was given orders ? 


THE MINISTER OF HOME AFFAIRS 
(S BUTA SINGH): (a) No, Sir. 
(b) to (e). Questions do not arise. 


Problems faced by Refugees from Sri 
Lanka, Sangiadesh and Borma 


4542. DR. G.S. RAJHANS: Will 
the Minister of HOME AFFAIRS be 
pieased to state : 


(a) whether the refugees from Sri 
Lanka, Bangladesh and Burma have 
recently protested against Government’s 
apathy towards them at New Delhi; 


££ 
(०) the demands of the refugees and 
action taken thereon; 


(c) whether Government propose to 
appoint a high level committee to study 
the probiems of refugees in India; and 


(d) steps being taken in this regard 2 


THE MINISTER OF STATE IN 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS phe 
CHINTAMANI PANIGRAHI) : (a) aod 
(b). 1t is understood that ope Shri Jugesh 
Chander Malik a D.P. from former East 


89 . Written Answers 


Pakigtan had undertaken fast at Boat Club 
for getting rehabilitation assistance and for 
getting new relief camps set up. Shri 
Malik, as per policy, is not eligible for 
any rehabilitation assistance as he has 
deserted the rehabilitation sites twice. 
Camps for refugees from Sri Lanka have 
already been set up in Tamil, Nadu. For 
other displaced persons/repatriates there 
does not seem to be aay need for setting up 
new camps 


(c) and (d). No, Sir. 


Production of 1.CA for Air Defence 


4543. SHRI K. S. RAO : Will the 
Minister of DEFENCE be pleased to 
state : 


(a) whether Goverament have decided 
to go in for the production of light combat 
aircraft (LCA) to meet the future require- 
ments of air defence; 


(b) whether Government have also 
finally decided to deve