OCR text extracts (archive.org djvu.txt) around mentions of Mahajan Field Firing Range. OCR errors are frequent; check page images.
SOURCE: https://archive.org/details/eparlib.nic.in.62680

----- [char 164513-172865] last page marker before: ?
ernment is 
serious to rehabilitate the affected families, with the result that the 
poor persons are being deprived of their rights and forced to live in 
deplorable condition without the basic facilities like education, 
health, drinking water and employment. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that Government must set up a high level 
Committee to look into all the Resettlement and Rehabilitation works 
being executed in the Bolangir District for the project affected 
families. The Committee also desire that Ministry must ensure that 
sitting of the Monitoring Committee be held regularly as per schedule 
and its officers should attend it scrupulously irrespective of their 
ranks and their designations and the matter of not attending the 
Monitoring Committee Meeting by the General Manager, Ordnance 
Factory be taken up at the highest level in order to give relief and 
extend possible rehabilitation facilities to the poor land displaced 
families. The Committee earnestly desire that the Ministry of 


70 


Defence, Command Officers of Army and the State Government 
officials must cooperate with the land displaced families and treat 
them sympathetically. 


Rajasthan 
Mahajan Field Firing Range, Bikaner 


3.65 The Government of India sanctioned this project on 
2 November 1982 and total land acquired measuring 3,32,985 acres 
and out of the total land about 1,25,035.70 acres was private land. The 
possession of the land handed over to the Ministry of Defence in 
1987. The land acquired from the 33 villages of district Bikaner and 
3256 families were affected by this project. Rs. 89.54 lakhs were paid 
to the project affected families as rehabilitation amount and 
compensation amount @Rs. 2750 paid to per person as per High Court’s 
order. 


3.66 On being asked by the Committee, regarding necessity to 
acquire Mahajan Ranges, when 300 Kms away is a larger range in 
Pokhran where the testing and exercises are continuing on a larger 
scale, the representative of the Ministry of Defence stated are as under: 


“The Ministry of Defence is dependent on the requirements of the 
Armed Forces. The requirement of the Armed Forces is there and 
we cannot meet all the requirements substantially. In fact, a larger 
number of testing has to be done in different places which we are 
not able to meet. Therefore, you would know ever for Chandipur 
on sea, certain testing is being done in the sea. What I humbly 
submit is that the Armed Forces are not lavish with their 
requirements. In fact, they need land for these kinds of exercises. 
They do require a lot of land and a lot of areas.” 


Rehabilitation package 


3.67 In regard to the rehabilitation package offered to the affected 
families, the Ministry of Defence, in a written reply, stated as under: 
1. Agriculture land measuring 1,08,316 acres allotted. 

2. Three new villages created for resettlement. 
(i) Ram Nagar 
(ii) Krishna Nagar 
(iii) Kumbhan bass 
) 


(iv) Resettled in 6 other villages 


71 


Villages have primary and secondary schools, metalled road, 
water reservoir, health centre, veterinary hospital and 
community centre. (allotted plots of sizes : 60' x 90' plot) 


Scheme implemented as follows: Residential plots given 
between 1986-87, Provision of community oriented benefits 
on going. 


3.68 On being asked by the Committee, whether rehabilitation 
amount was demanded by Rajasthan Government, the Ministry of 


Defence in its written reply has stated: 


“For Mahajan Field Firing Ranges, private land with an area of 


1,25,035.70 acres was acquired and the awarded cost was 
Rs. 64.11 crore. Rehabilitation amount of Rs. 89.54 lakh was also 
paid. Before the acquisition of this Field Firing Range, a number 


of high level meetings took place between the Ministry of Defence 
and Rajasthan Government. From the perusal of the record of these 


meetings the following facts emerge: 


(a) 


The Collector had estimated the market value of land as 
Rs. 500/bigha, while the Ministry of Defence had estimated 
the price of land as Rs. 300/bigha. In spite of this variation 
in the estimates of land prices, the villagers were paid within 
a price range of Rs. 700/Bigha (minimum) and Rs. 1000/ 
Bigha (maximum). 


The State Government of Rajasthan had also requested 
Government of India to bear the consequential expenditure 
involved not only in the acquisition of existing lands and 
building but also for development of new lands for abadi, 
agricultural and pasturage purposes, and extending financial 
assistance to displaced persons to help commence 
agricultural and animal husbandry operations. 


However, later in a meeting dated 29.1.81, the following 
decisions were taken: 


(i) Defence Ministry would not be involved in the 
mechanics of rehabilitation, and it was suggested to make 
payment of lump-sum to the State Governments for the 
purpose. It was agreed that only families whose 
homesteads would be acquired would be considered for 
computing this amount. 


72 


(ii) It was decided that Defence Ministry will pay a lump- 
sum to the State Government towards the cost of 
rehabilitation. The amount will be calculated @ Rs. 2,500 
per displaced family. 


(d) Later on, after a decision of High Court of Rajasthan dated 
18.10.05, the Ministry of Defence paid Rs. 2750 per family.” 


3.69 The Committee are constrained to note that a meagre amount 
of Rs. 2750 per family was given to displaced persons in Mahajan 
Field Firing Range Project, Rajasthan in consultation with the State 
Government. The Committee fail to understand how with such a 
meagre amount the rehabilitation of displaced families will be done. 
The Committee, keeping in view the better rehabilitation packages 
provided by the Ministry of Defence under Project Seabird, strongly 
desire that in Mahajan Field Firing Range, Rajasthan, also, the 
Ministry of Defence should offer a good rehabilitation package, 
containing basic facilities, namely, housing, education, health and 
employment to the affected families to enable them to live in a 
dignified manner. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry 
of Defence and the Government of Rajasthan should make joint 
efforts in order to ensure better and timely completion of 
rehabilitation of the displaced persons/families. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the progress made by the Ministry in 
this regard. 


Tamil Nadu 


3.70 In the State of Tamil Nadu, the Ministry of Defence acquired 
the land for the following projects: 


Naval Air Station, Arakonam 


3.71 The Ministry of Defence in its written replies stated that 
Government of India sanctioned this project on 27 June 1986 and again 
on 26 March 1990 and total land acquired measuring 1242.55 acres 
were acquired from the seven villages of district Arakonam. Out of 
total land 911.52 acres is private land. The possession of the land was 
handed over to the Ministry of Defence in 1987-88. The Ministry of 
Defence sanctioned payment of Rs. 2.97 crores to the State Government 
for acquisition of land measure 911.52 acres Rehabilitation amount of 
Rs. 0.29 crores. Total number of families was 89, out of this, 52 families 
in private land and 37 families in State Government land. 


Rehabilitation package 


3.72 In regard to the rehabilitation package offered to the affected 
families, the Ministry of Defence, in a written reply, stated as under: 


1. A sum of Rs. 29.59 lakhs was demanded by the State 
Government for rehabilitation of 52 families in private land 
and 37 families in State Government land. 


73 


2. 52 dwelling houses were built at a cost of Rs. 7500 per 
family in the land allotted by the State Government and 
named as New Silver Pet Colony. Cost Rs. 3,90,000. 


3. 37 families who were in State Government Poramoke land 
were given a sum of Rs. 500 per family as displacement 
allowances. Cost Rs. 18,500. 


4. Provision of potable water and street light to the newly 
created Colony. Cost Rs. 50,000. 


3.73 During the oral evidence of the Collector, Vellore had informed 
the Committee that out of 940 cases of land acquisition, in 849 cases 
original petitions were filed and sub-court had rewarded enhanced 
compensation in 603 cases. Naval authorities instead of paying them 
enhanced compensation had preferred appeal against the

----- [char 198071-201784] last page marker before: ?
d the representatives 
of the Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee and informed 
the members that the Committee would take oral evidence of the 
Ministry on the subject ‘A Critical Review of Rehabilitation of Displaced 
Persons.” 


3. Before starting discussion on the subject, the Committee placed 
on record their appreciation for the Armed Forces and the Ministry of 
Defence for commendable work done in the earthquake affected areas 
in J&K. 


4. The Committee then sought clarifications from the Ministry on 
various issues like rehabilitation policy of Ministry of Defence vis-a-vis 
other Government Departments, court cases in regard to land 
acquisition, employment for displaced persons, monitoring mechanism 
etc. The Committee also raised various points based on their study 
visit to Defence establishments and rehabilitation sites at Hyderabad, 
Bangalore, Chennai and Karwar etc. 


5. Several issues/queries were raised by Members, which were 
responded to by the Ministry officials. The Committee desired some 
more information on the following issues: 


— Rehabilitation package extended by the Ministry of Defence 
and State Govt. in the rehabilitation cases of Mahajan Field 


92 


Firing Ranges and about acquisition of land in Himachal 
Pradesh for Averi Project in Kangra district. 


Efforts made by the Ministry of Defence to solve the pending 
court cases with regard to compensation paid to the affected 
people for acquiring their lands. Also details of the cases 
where appeals were filed by the Government against the 
affected family or court orders. 


Procedure followed for processing of cases/processing/ 
disbursement of funds by the Government for various 
purposes like, house, electricity, cattle shade, employment, 
etc. 


Policy of Government for expansion of already existing 
defence establishments and acquiring more land for them. 


6. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence assured the 
Committee to furnish information on above issues at an early date. 


Witnesses then withdrew. 


7. The verbatim record was kept. 


The Committee then adjourned. 


MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06) 

The Committee sat on Thursday, the 12th January, 2006 from 
1100 hrs. to 1500 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 

PRESENT 
Shri R.K. Anand —in the Chair 


MEMBERS 


Lok Sabha 


. Shri A.V. Bellarmin 

. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh 

. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 


aA 0एा ® wWN 


Rajya Sabha 


7. Smt. N.P. Durga 
8. Shri Janardan Dwivedi 


9. Shri Lalit Suri 


SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary 


List OF NoON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES 


- Shri Pankaj Kumar, Advocate, New Delhi 
- Shri Basudeb Majumdar, New Delhi 

. Shri H.S. Yadav, New Delhi 

. Shri Vikas Valunjkar, Pune 


Pe WO N eR 


93 


94 


5. Shri Venkatesh Shete, Pune 
6. Shri Gajanan Y. Naik, Pune 
7. Shri Balasaheb Gawali, Nasik 
8. Shri R.D. Dange, Nasik 

9. Shri Baburao Mojad, Nasik 


2. In the absence of Hon’ble Chairman, Standing Committee on 
Defence, the Committee chose Shri R.K. Anand, M.P. to act as Chairman 
for the sitting under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha. 


3. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Shri Pankaj 
Kumar, Advocate and invited his attention to Direction 58 by the 
Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of 
the deliberations of the sitting and requested him to give his views/ 
suggestio