OCR text extracts (archive.org djvu.txt) around mentions of Mahajan Field Firing Range. OCR errors are frequent; check page images.
SOURCE: https://archive.org/details/eparlib.nic.in.65173

----- [char 57747-61480] last page marker before: ?
 which has about 75 tank 
fittable improvements over and above Arjun MBT Mark-l. These improvements have 
been arrived in mutual consultation with all the stakeholders. The Committee are of the 
view that Arjun Mark-II should be provided at the earliest to the Forces and after its user 
evaluation report, the large scale production of the same should be started. The 
Committee also desire that constant improvements may be made in the existing Mark-II 
and thereafter, each and every model should be improved and after a certain period of 
time it should be sent for production, without making Army wait perpetually for the so 
called perfect tank." 


49. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under: 


‘DRDO took up the design & development of Arjun MBT Mk-II during the year of 2010as 
per DGMF requirement with various improvements, with due involvement of all the 
stakeholders including Users, and successfully fielded the first prototype for the User 
trials within 2 year of time. 


User trials have been planned in five phases. The first three phases comprises 
extensive field evaluation of all the improvements regressively at Pokharan Field Firing 
Ranges (PFFR) and Mahajan Field Firing Ranges (MFFR). Fourth phase of trial was 
planned at Avadi. Fifth phase of trial consists of DGQA evaluation and Maintenance 
Evaluation Trials (MET). 


As of now, all the first three phases [Phase 1 to 3] of field intensive User trials have been 
successfully completed. Part of Phase IV User trials at Avadi related to Step Climbing, 
Trench crossing and improvement specific medium fording exercise were also 
successfully accomplished. DGQA evaluation for the successful improvements have 
already been commenced from Feb 2014 and actions have also been initiated for the 
MET evaluation. 


At present, Arjun MBT Mk-II Prototype-| has successfully covered around 5,660 km of 
automotive trials and also commendable accomplishment of firing of various type of tank 
ammunitions, including firing of 22 missiles. 


DRDO conceived & incorporated LAser Homing Anti-Tank (LAHAT) Guided Missile, in 
association with M/s Israeli Aerospace Industries, in order to facilitate the tank to support 
the futuristic network based warfare scenario. As such, the Laser Target Designator 
integrated to the Gunner's Main Sight for the firing of missiles has been successfully 
incorporated and the LAHAT missiles were also successfully fired from Arjun MBT Mk-II- 
main gun. 


24 


User has been insisting for performance of missiles at lower ranges of 1200-1500 m for 
accepting LAHAT missile. However, OEM for missiles M/s IAI had intimated that 
accuracy can be guaranteed for ranges of 1500 m and above only. The required 
performances at lower ranges are technically difficult to achieve due to the basic design 
of the missile. 


As on date, 53 improvements, out of total finalized 73 tank fitable improvements, have 
already been declared successful by the User based on the trials feedback. DRDO is 
planning to field the Arjun MBT Mk ॥ for final phase of User trials after incorporating 
various suggestions made by the Users on balance tank fitable improvements. All the 
improvements will be demonstrated except the performance of the LAHAT missile. 


DRDO is working on development of indigenous missile with a timeframe of four years. 
User has been requested to consider acceptance of LAHAT missile with modified 
Acceptance Test Procedure considering the assured performance of the missiles for 
1500 m and above, till such time the indigenous missile is developed. 


The missile firing capability is retrofit-able and, hence, can be fitted on to the Arjun MBT 
Mk ॥ during production itself. Hence, 

----- [char 121270-125003] last page marker before: ?
loping Arjun Main Battle Tank (MBT) Mark-ll, which has about 75 tank fittable 
improvements over and above Arjun MBT Mark-l. These improvements have been arrived in 
mutual consultation with all the stakeholders. The Committee are of the view that Arjun Mark-ll 
should be provided at the earliest to the Forces and after its user evaluation report, the large 
scale production of the same should be started. The Committee also desire that constant 
improvements may be made in the existing Mark-Il and thereafter, each and every model 
should be improved and after a certain period of time it should be sent for production, without 
making Army wait perpetually for the so called perfect tank. 


Reply of the Government 


DRDO took up the design & development of Arjun MBT Mk-Il during the year of 2010as per 
DGMF requirement with various improvements, with due involvement of all the stakeholders 
including Users, and successfully fielded the first prototype for the User trials within 2 year of 
time. 


User trials have been planned in five phases. The first three phases comprises extensive field 
evaluation of all the improvements regressively at Pokharan Field Firing Ranges (PFFR) and 
Mahajan Field Firing Ranges (MFFR). Fourth phase of trial was planned at Avadi. Fifth phase 
of trial consists of DGQA evaluation and Maintenance Evaluation Trials (MET). 


51 


As of now, all the first three phases [Phase 1 to 3] of field intensive User trials have been 
successfully completed. Part of Phase IV User trials at Avadi related to Step Climbing, Trench 
crossing and improvement specific medium fording exercise were also successfully 
accomplished. DGQA evaluation for the successful improvements have already been 
commenced from Feb 2014 and actions have also been initiated for the MET evaluation. 


At present, Arjun MBT Mk-Il Prototype-| has successfully covered around 5,660 km of 
automotive trials and also commendable accomplishment of firing of various type of tank 
ammunitions, including firing of 22 missiles. 


DRDO conceived & incorporated LAser Homing Anti-Tank (LAHAT) Guided Missile, in 
association with M/s Israeli Aerospace Industries, in order to facilitate the tank to support the 
futuristic network based warfare scenario. As such, the Laser Target Designator integrated to 
the Gunner's Main Sight for the firing of missiles has been successfully incorporated and the 
LAHAT missiles were also successfully fired from Arjun MBT Mk-II-main gun. 


Userhas been insisting for performance of missiles at lower ranges of 1200-1500 m for 
accepting LAHAT missile. However, OEM for missiles M/s IAI had intimated that accuracy can 
be guaranteed for ranges of 1500 m and above only. The required performances at lower 
ranges are technically difficult to achieve due to the basic design of the missile. 


As on date, 53 improvements, out of total finalized 73 tank fitable improvements, have already 
been declared successful by the User based on the trials feedback. DRDO is planning to field 
the Arjun MBT Mk II for final phase of User trials after incorporating various suggestions made 
by the Users on balance tank fitable improvements. All the improvements will be demonstrated 
except the performance of the LAHAT missile. 


DRDO is working on development of indigenous missile with a timeframe of four years. User 
has been requested to consider acceptance of LAHAT missile with modified Acceptance Test 
Procedure considering the assured performance of the missiles for 1500 m and above, till such 
time the indigenous missile is developed. 


The missile firing capability is retrofit-able and, hence, can be fitted on to the Arjun MBT Mk II 
during production itself. Hence, DRDO