OCR text extracts (archive.org djvu.txt) around mentions of Mahajan Field Firing Range. OCR errors are frequent; check page images.
SOURCE: https://archive.org/details/eparlib.nic.in.3230

----- [char 347638-351351] last page marker before: ?
ISHNA 

MURTHY: 

SHRI MADHAVRAO SCIN- 

DIA: 


Will the PRIME MINISTER be pleased 
to state: 


(a) whether Government are aware of 
the massing of troops by Pakistan along the 
Indian border and also reported activation of 
airfields by Pakistan; if so, the reaction of 
Government in this regard; 


(0) the measures taken to protect the 
country from any pre-emptive ground or air 
attack from Pakistan; 


(c) whether to normalise the situation 
India had withdrawn its Force to peace-time 
location in Mahajan sector but Pakistan 
continues to builds up; pressure in Chamb- 
Jauria Sector in Jammu and Kashmir; and 


(d) if so, the preventive measured to 


SEPTEMBER 3, 1990 


Written Answers 428 


protect the vital Chamb-Jauria Sector? 


THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (SHRI RAJA 
RAMANNA): (a) Government are aware that 
Pak formations and units along the Border/ 
Line of Control have been in a state of alert 
and preparedness since January, 1990 and 
that their air fields have also been operation- 
alised. 


(b) Our armed forces are alert, to 
protect the territorial integrity of our country. 


(०) In June, 1990 our anmoured units 
carrying out training at Mahajan Ranges 
were unilaterally moved to their permanent 
locations with a view to reduce tension. As 
far as Pak formations are concerned, thereis 
information of certain elements being in the 
process of moving back to their permanent 
locations. The position is being closely 
monitored. 


(d) Adequate measures, as part of our 
operational preparedness, have been taken 
to ensure our territorial integfity. 


[Translation] 
Indian Institute of Science, Ranchi 


4125. PROF. YADUNATH PANDEY: 
Will the PRIME MINISTER be pleaséd to 
state: 


(a) whether the Indian Institute of Sci- 
ence Ranchi, was established as an effec- 
tive step for the progress and development 
of science in Bihar and was recognised by 
the Union Government in 1987; 


(b) whether admissions were taken by 
some students in this Institute during 1987 
and annual examinations were also con- 
ducted for the students admitted for the two- 
year course; 


429 Written Answers 


(c) if so, whether the examinations 
result of such students have since been 
declared, if not the reasons therefor; and 


(9) the time by which their resuks are 
likely to be declared? 


THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE 
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DE- 
VELOPMENT (SHRI CHIMANBHAI 
MEHTA): (a) The Indian Institute of Science, 
Ranchi was recognised temporarily by the 
Government of Bihar, Department of Sci- 
ence and Technology in October 1987 fora 
period of two years for conduct of diploma 
course in Hotel Management. This recogni- 
tion has been cancelled inJune, 1990, by the 
State Government of Bihar. This college has 
not ben recognised by the Union Govern- 
ment/AICTE. 


(b) to (d). The first batch of students in 
Hotel Management was admitted by this 
Institute in January, 1987 and final examina- 
tion was conducted by the Institute in De- 
cember, 1989 and the result has been de- 
clared in January, 1990. 


[English] . 
Problems of Chronically Sick Industries 
4126. SHRI = SHANTARAM 
POTDUKHE: Will the PRIME MINISTER be 
pleased to state: 
(a) whether the administrative Minis- 
tries of 40 chronically sick Central Public 
Sector Undertakings have been asked to 


study their problems and plan strategies; 


(b) if so, the names of these undertak- 
ings; 


(c) the parameters envisaged for draw- 
ing plans to review these undertakings; and 


(d) whether it is proposed to associate 


BHADRA 12, 1912 (SAKA) 


Written Answers 430 


any experts from the private sector in the 
relevant line of production with this st