MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 


DEFENCE LANDS AND LAND USE POLICY 


ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 


TENTH LOK SABHA 


NINTH REPORT 
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(1991-92) 

(TENTH LOK SABHA) 


MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 


DEFENCE LANDS AND LAND USE POLICY 


Presented to Lok Sabha on 13-3-1992 


LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


March, 1992/Phalguna, 1913 (Saka) 


E.C. No. 1271 


Price : Rs. 12.00 


©1992 By Lox SABHA SECRETARIAT 


Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (Seventh Edition) and printed by the Manager, 
Photo Litho Unit, Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON ६8४६5, ..........००००-०००००००००० (iii) 
INTRODUCTION ..........७.०००००००००००००००००४०००० न लत Sadat (५) 
CHAPTER | LAND HOLDINGS 
IntrOdictON sccsasssacedcasievicds ०३४४० ०७३ के 5 सगे बल ३ 1 
Land: Holdings जा अप के मर 2 
Shortfall of land ..................०७०००००००५००५०००००००- 4 
Ceiling on Land Holdings .......................06. 5 
Norms of Land Holdings...................scseeeee 6 
Reorganisation of Ranges ...............७००००००-०- 8 
Notification of ३82८8 ...............७००००-००००००००-* 11 
National Test Range ............-.... ०००० ००००० ००००० 12 
Land Occupied by Army in Siliguri.............. 13 
Conclusions/Recommendations................... 14 
‘CHAPTER I] LAND USE 
Utilisation Pattern ................. मत मिलन न 19 
Lands not under active use of Defence 
DOI VICOS ogi nicietida Seriaseeeadeee ces 20 
Unused 1.8105. ..................७७७००६००००५०००००००००००० 21 
Old: Grants मे ले ला व मम की लि अल 23 
Military Farms .................०.०००००००००००००००००००००० 28 
Cantonments and Military Stations .............. 30 
Conclusions/Recommendations................... 38 
CHAPTER III FINANCIAL RESOURCES 
Requirement of Funds...............cccecsceseseeees 45 
Internal Revenue Generation..................008. 47 
Projection Of Funds...............scscsssescscecsceees 50 
Budget Estimates ....................-००००--०००००००००- 52 
Conclusions/Recommendations................... 54 
CHAPTER IV LaND ACQUISITION 
Land Acquisition Procedure ...................«- 57 
Policy Guidelines for Acquisition of Lands.... 58 
Delays in Acquisition Proposals ................ 60 
Cost OVERTUN ,...............००००००००००००००४०००००००००* 61 
Delegation of powers to State Governments 62 
Lapse Of Proceedings ...........cssscsscessesessseees 68 
Improvements in LA Act, 1894 and RAIP 
261 19352 62085 0518: 0403 %211182007 69 
Time Limits for Completing Acquisition 
PYOCCOGIN 4 की Te 
Monitoring and Review of Land Acquisition 
PROCESS ५ ७०७००७४७०४४७४७४०४४४४४७/४०७७४१ ४४०४४ ३६ 76 


CHAPTER VI 


CHaPrer VII 


Cuarrer VIII 


(ii) 


LAND ACQUISITION AND CITIZENS 
Market Value ...................००००००००००००००५०००००५००० 
Litigation for Enhancement of Compensation 
Negotiated Award .....................००००००००००००००० 
Disbursement of Compensation................... 
Rajasthan Government Practice for retaining 
share of Acquisition Award..................06 
Conclusions/Recommendations................... 
REQUISITIONING OF PROPERTY 
Requisitioning of Property ..............००००००००००- 
Time Limit to hold a property on requisition 
Revision of Recurring Compensation ........... 
Conclusions/Recommendations.................0 
MANAGEMENT OF LAND 
Title Deeds, Plans and Demarcation of 
छ0प070987125 ..................«००००००००७००००७००५००००००००० 
Organisational Structure ........................-:- 
Delegation Of Powers .....................०-०- eases 
Encroachment ....................००००७५००००००००००५०००० 
Conclusions/Recommendations................... 
Laws GOVERNING LAND ACQUISITION .......... 
Conclusions/Recommendations................... 
REHABILITATION Grants/ RESETTLEMENT 


COMPOSITION OF THE ESTIMATES COMMITTEE 
(1991-92) 


Shri Manoranjan Bhakta — Chairman 
MEMBERS 


. Shri A. Charles 

. Shri Rajendra Agnihotri 

Shri Mumtaz Ansari 

. Shri Ayub Khan 

. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal 

. Shri Somjibhai Damor 

. Shri Digvijaya Singh 

. Shri Pandurang Pundlik Fundkar 
. Shrimati Girija Devi 

. Shri Nurul Islam 

. Shri R. Jeevarathinam 

. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi 

. Shri C. K. Kuppuswamy 

. Shri Dharampal Singh Malik 

. Shri Manjay Lal 

. Shri Hannan Mollah 

. Shri 0. Devraya Naik 

. Shri Rupchand Pal 

Shri Sriballav Panigrahi 

Shri Harin Pathak 

Shri Harish Narayan Prabhu Zantye 
Shri D. Venkateshwara Rao 
Shri Ebrahim Sulaiman Sait 
Shri Moreshwar Save 

Shri Manabendra Shah 

Shri Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
Shri Ramashray Prasad Singh 

. Shri Syed Shahabuddin 

Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 


SECRETARIAT 


6 6७ 6० 523 5 (७ + ७७ ६७ +5 5 ७ 69 -३ ७; (५७ + ९७० ७ 


Ww 
pms 


SSENISRESH: 


Shri G.L. Batra—Additional Secretary 
. Shri K.K. Sharma—Joint Secretary 

. Shr 8.8. Pandit—Director 

. Shri K.L. Narang—Under Secretary 


2 WNP 


@ Resigned from the Committee w.e.f. 6 March, 1992. 
* Elected w.e.f. 6 March, 1992 vice Shri Vijay N. Patil resigned from the Committee. 


(iil) 


INTRODUCTION 


I, the Chairman of the Estimates Committee, having been authorised by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Ninth 
Report on the Ministry of Defence—Defence Lands and Land Use Policy. 


2. The subject was selected for examination by the Estimates Committee 
(1990-91), which, after considering the preliminary material, written notes 
and other detailed information, took evidence of representatives of the 
Ministry of Defence on 6 November, 1990. As certain issues concerning 
acquisition of land under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and requisitioning 
of immovable property under the Requisitioning and Acquisition of 
Immovable Property Act, 1952 had arisen out of the discussion with 
representatives of Ministry of Defence, the Estimates Committee (1990-91) 
on 4 January, 1991 took evidence also of the representatives of the 
Ministries of Rural Development and Urban Development on those issues, 
which fell within their respective jurisdiction. The views of the Ministry of 
Law and Justice on certain related legal issues were also elicited through 
their representatives present during the evidence. While finalising their 
report on the subject the Committee have, besides the above, also taken 
note of representations submitted by different organizations and 
individuals. 


3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to officers of the 
Ministries mentioned above for placing before them the material and 
information desired in connection with examination of the subject. The 
Committee also wish to place on record their appreciation for the 
frankness with which representatives of these Ministries have shared their 
views, perception and problems with the Committee. 


4. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to all the 
organisations and individuals who furnished memoranda, representations 
and suggestions, when the Estimates Committee and its Sub-Committee on 
Defence Matters visited Secunderabad Cantonment in October, 1990 and 
Jodhpur and Jaisalmer in January, 1991, respectively. 


5. The Committee would also like to express their gratitude to the 
Estimates Committee (1990-91) especially to the then Chairman of the 
Committee for the able guidance and nght direction provided by him to 
the Committee (1990-91) in obtaining information and taking evidence for 
an indepth and comprehensive study of the subject. The composition of the 
Committee is given at Appendix-I to the Report. 

6. The Committee (1991-92) considered and adopted the Report at their 
sitting held on 14 February, 1992. Minutes* of the sittings form Part II of 
the Report. 

7. In this Report, the Committee have observed that since 1960 Defence 
land holdings have increased four-fold from 5.84 lakh acres as on 1.1.1960 
to the total holdings of 22.16 lakh acres at the end of 1989. This includes 
96,000 acres of land hired or requisitioned for Defence purposes. 


*\Not printed. Five Copies placed in Parliament Library. 


(vi) 


The Ministry of Defence have attributed the manifold increase in 
Defence land holdings in the national security environment during the last 
three decades as a consequence of which the Armed Forces had to be 
augmented and modernised. This includes implementation of re-equipment 
plans involving induction of weapon systems of greater fire power and 
longer range and also re-deployment of fighting formations, both 
necessitating greater requirement of land. 


Interestingly, the Army Commands have projected additional 
requirements for land totalling 2,20,907 acres, of which 1,29,402 acres are 
required for different categories of ranges and the balance for Key 
Location Plans (KLP). In addition to this the Air Force and Navy and 
other users of lands under the Ministry of Defence requires 36,130 acres of 
land. The importance of the question of evolving a sustainable Defence 
Land Policy is thus obvious. 


8. In their Report Committee have observed that owing to land being 
progressively brought under intensive agriculture use and for other 
development activities, the State Governments have been finding, it 
difficult to issue necessary notifications in regard to field firing ranges. In 
many cases the State Governments have either refused outright to give ‘no 
objection certificates’ or shown reluctance to do so. At the same time 
many State Governments have either de-notified some of the existing 
ranges or have been delaying renewal of notifications. These developments 
have imparted a degree of urgency to the question of reorganisation of 
existing firing ranges which involves acquisition of additional land in large 
measure as also large sums of money that are just not available. 


The report of the Committee should therefore be viewed in the context 
of the challenge implicit in the problem of higher defence land requirement 
and its efficient management. 


9. The Report contains the following important recommendations:— 


(i) From a long term perspective the Ministry of Defence must acquire 
as many permanent ranges as it can afford and the circumstances permit. 
For this purpose a long term prograame of land acquisition may be drawn 
and implemented. A Special Team may be constituted for reorganisation 
of ranges for the Defence services so that it addresses itself to the totality 
of the problem from identification to acquisition. 


(1) The Government should give a fair deal to the land holders who are 
forcibly dispossessed of their land for a specified duration of the year 
under the Manoeuvres, Field Firing and Artillery Practice Act, 1938 and 
give them due compensation including damages for crops. For this 
purpose, if necessary, amendments may be carried out in the Act in 
consultation with the State Governments. 


(iii) In regard to surplus lands owned by the Ministry of Defence such as 
abandoned air fields and camping grounds, all efforts may be made to 
transfer such lands to the State Governments concerned and other 


(vii) 


Departments/Public Sector Undertakings of the Central Government. In 
case State Governments do not come forward to take oyer these lands the 
option of disposing of such lands on a commercial basis needs to be 
considered seriously. 


(iv) The annual grant of Rs. 25 crores provided by the Ministry of 
Defence to the Cantonment Boards for effecting improvements in civic 
amenities in all the 62 Cantonments is far too inadequate. The Committee 
feel that Cantonments ought to be treated on the same basis as Union 
Territories and other Local Bodies like NDMC are treated in regard to 
maintenance grants. The Ministry of Defence should immediately enhance 
grant-in-aid to Cantonments. 


(v) The Ministry of Defence should evolve a long-term plan for 
identification and consolidation of military areas within Cantonments and 
their ultimate conversion into Military Stations. 


(vi) Timely completion of land acquisition process and speedy 
disbursement of compensation to the land owners is most essential and, the 
Government in the Ministry of Rural Development must impress upon 
other concerned Ministries/Departments to ensure adequate budgetary 
allocation so that disbursement of compensation and taking over of 
possession of land after the declaration of award, are not postponed or 
delayed for any reason whatsoever. 


(शा) The Ministry of Rural Development should examime the various 
principles adopted by the State Governments for fixation of market value 
of the land to determine how far these have given nse to prolonged and 
costly litigations for enhancement in compensation awarded by Land 
Acquisition authorities. The Ministry should also suggest ways of removing 
the existing deficiencies both in the law and procedure, in the interest of 
the land losers and the State. 


(viii) The RAIP Act be amended without any delay so as to provide for 
payment of solatium in cases where any requisitioned property is sought to 
be acquired. However, till such an amendment is made, owners of the 
property should be given an option to receive compensation either on the 
pattern of Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 
1952 or Land Acquisition Act, 1894. 


(ix) When the process of land acquisition proceedings are initiated, a 
Committee comprising the Representatives of the Acquiring Department, 
and the Land Acquisition Collector concerned should be constituted to 
hold negotiations with interested persons for settlement of the amount of 
compensation. 


(x) A maximum period for retaining requisitioned properties with the 
requisitioning authority may be brought down from the existing 17 years to 
six years which is considered a reasonable time limit for the purpose. The 
RAIP Act, 1952 may be amended accordingly. 


21461 5-3 


(viii) 


(xi) The Ministry of Urban Development who are the nodal Ministry for 
the RAIP Act, should impress upon all the Ministries/ Departments to take 
expeditious action for timely release of requisitioned properties. 


(xii) The Ministry of Urban Development should finalise early the 
proposal of the Ministry of Defence to extend the provisions of Public 
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 to Cantonment 
Boards. 


(xiii) The Ministry of Rural Development should undertake the task of 
enacting a common law on the subject of requisition and acquisition of 
land by the Union as well as States, after an indepth and thorough study of 
the various Central and State Laws. The suggested legislation ought to 
reflect: all those features regarding procedure of acquisition, time limits for 
completion of acquisition proceedings, realistic market value of land, 
principles of compensation, speedy disbursement, opportunities for judicial 
reliefs to the aggrieved, and statutory provision for rehabilitation grant and 
resettlement policy, and preference in means of livelihood and special 
provisions for lands in tribal areas where land transactions have not been/ 
are not recorded properly, as are most favourable and advantageous to the 
land loser. 


(xiv) There should be a proper rehabilitation policy for the whole of 
country in order to obviate the existing disparities in the relief and 
rehabilitation measures for persons affected by large scale acquisition of 
land. 


10. For facility of reference, the observations/recommeniUations of the 
Committee have been printed in the thick type in the body of the Report 
and have also been reproduced in the consolidated form in Appendix II to 
the Report. 


New DELHI; MANORANJAN BHAKTA, 
March 5, 1992 Chairman, 


Estimates Committee. 
Phalguna 15, 1913 (S) 


CHAPTER I 


LAND HOLDINGS 


Introductory 


1.1 Defence lands are held as under:- 


(i) Inside Cantonments 
(1) Outside Cantonments. 


It has not been found possible to trace the precise historical origin of 
every Cantonment. Some lands came into the hands of the East India 
Company/Government by right of conquest or by appropriation; some 
other lands were got through Treaty with the Ruling Chiefs. Some lands 
were acquired on payment of compensation to the original holders of the 
land or by exchanging for other, similarly got lands: 


In addition to the lands in Cantonments the Ministry of Defence hold 
lands outside Cantonment also. These have generally accrued to the 
Ministry of Defence through the following: 


(i) Acquisition 
Lands for field firing ranges, military stations, airfields, etc. were 
acquired under Land Acquisition Act, 1894, DI Act, RAIP Act, 1952 etc. 


(ii) Ex-State Forces Properties which accrued to the share of the Defence: 


Consequent upon the merger of the State Forces with the Indian Army, 
by virtue of Article 295(1) of the Constitution the properties that were 
with the State Forces which merged in the Indian Army became the 
properties of the Ministry of Defence. The Boards of Officers convened 
for the purpose at various stations decided as to which properties of Ex- 
State Forces were to be taken over for defence, a$ its share. Hence, in 
pursuance of the proceedings of the Boards of Officers such lands were 
taken over at a number of stations all over the country. 


(iti) Campling Grounds Certified by the Governor General in Council for 
use of Federal Government consequent upon promulgation of Government 
of India Act 1935 


A number of camping grounds existed in the ownership of Government 
of India for long and were created as halting places for foot-marching 
Army. Consequent upon the promulgation of the Government of India 
Act, 1935 the apportionment of properties between the Federal 
Government and the Provincial Governments was regulated under sections 
172 and 173 of the Act. A number of Gazette Notifications were issued in 


2 


respect of the lands used in various parts of the country as camping 
grounds in the late 1930s. The issuance of these notifications by itself did 
not create any new rights as such, in the lands of camping grounds in 
favour of Ministry of Defence, already existed in favour of the Ministry. 
But the notifications issued by the Government of India under the Act of 
1935 distinguished and notified the properties which were used, or 
intended to be used, for Federal purposes from other properties of the 
Government which were to be used for Provincial purposes. 


Land Holdings 


1.2 The land holdings of the Ministry of Defence during the past three 
decades have grown as shown below:— 


(in acres) 


Year Land owned Requisi- Hired Total 
tioned land land 
land २ 
1.1.60 §,23,205 42.716 18,072 5,83,993 
or 
5.84 lakh acres 
1.1.70 14,95,810 72,818 72,365 16,40,993 
or 
16.41 lakh acres 
1.1.80 16,42,621 34,626 71,810 17,49 ,057 
or 
17.49 lakh acres 
1.1.90 21,20,043 25,758 70,245 22,16 ,046 
or 


22.16 lakh acres, 


Factors leading to Additional Holdings 


1.3 The Ministry have indicated following factors which led to additional 
holdings:— 


In the wake of modernisation of the Forces and the re-equipment of the 
weapon systems with artillery, armour and missiles of longer ranges/ 
greater/power, for proper and integrated training of the Forces, and the 
testing of the arms/ammunitions/explosives longer, larger and an increased 


3 


number of ranges became necessary. Additional lands were made available 
for these purposes. Major additions are as detailed below:- 


(1) 1960-1970 

(a) Deolali Ranges 25,640 acres in. 1961 
(b) Babina Ranges 59,400 acres in 1962 
(c) Pokhran Ranges, Jaisalmer 3,96,648 acres in 1966 


(2) 1970-1980 
Central Proof Range, Itarsi 25,869 acres in 1970 


(3) 1980-1990 
Mahajan Ranges, Bikaner 3,31,329 acres in 1986 


In the aftermath of the 1962 War, the 1965 and the 1971 Indo-Pak Wars, 
and the threats associated with and following these conflicts, higher Force 
levels were authorised. 


Additional lands were needed to create the infrastructure for training/ 
office/storage accommodation and residential quarters. 


On recognition of the threat perceptions, the changing deployment of 
the Pak and China Forces and our operational plans, re-deployment of our 
own Forces had to be made. This necessitated procurement of additional 
land holdings at various locations. Our increased presence/vigilance along 
the Western border in Rajasthan and Gujarat followed the changes 
warranted from the 1965 and the 1971 Indo-Pak Wars. New airfields had 
to be developed. New Ordnance factories were set up and some of the 
existing factories were assigned additional responsibilities. The increased 
Superpower Presence in the Indian Ocean and the threat to our Exclusive 
Economic Zones along the Coast and around the Island territories created 
additional responsibilities for the Air Force, the Navy and the Coast 
Guard, in new areas. The DRDO also expanded its activities. 


Custodian /Service-wise Holding 
1.4 The Ministry of Defence have furnished the following details 


showing defence owned/requisitioned/hired land held Custodian/Service- 
wise as on list January, 1990: 


Custodian/ Service Land Requisi- Hired Total 
owned tioned Land Land 
By MOD Land on 
charge 
1, Army (including Military 17,69,170 24,600 51,718 18,45,488 
Farms) 
2. Air Force’ (including 1,58,841 1,116 7,731 1,67,688 
RCPO) 
3. Navy 28,799 42 1,331 30,172 


4. Ordnance Factories 54,162 aoe 133 54,295 


5. DRDO 9,976 —_ 2,106 12,082 
6. DG NCC 95 — 4 99 
7. DGQA (erstwhile DGI) 26,403 — 7,200 33,603 
8. Defence Accounts Deptt. 140 — — 140 
9. Coast Guards 279 — 22 301 
10. 1.D.E.8.(DEO) 60,828 — — 60,828 
11. Cantt. Boards 11,350 — — 11,350 

(managed/ vested) 

Total: 21,20,043 25,758 70,245 22,16,046 


Shortfall of Land 


1.5 Asked what was the current shortfall of land required for the 
following categories in respect of all the custodians/services} 


(a) For Office, Housing and other related facilities; 
(b) for storage of all kinds, and 
(c) for training, inclusive of testing of arms, ammunitions etc. 


The Ministry in a written note to the Committee stated that verified 
details of the to-date shortfall, separately for each of the three categories, 
is not readily available. The position in respect of various users however is 
as follows:- 


(a) Army 
be 
Command Details of requirements 
(in acres) 
KLP Small arms/grenade 
ranges 
1. Southern (+) 35,044 (—) 24,458 
2. Eastern (-—) 6,319 (-) 24,350 
3. Western (-) 12,563 (-—) 26,573 
4. Central (—) 32,729 (—) 24,154 
5. Northern (-) 48,818 (—) 29,867 
6. New raising (—) 26,120 
Total (—) 91,505 (—) 1,29,402 


Only in Southern Command there is some surplus KLP holding. This 
surplus can not necessarily, be set off against the deficiency faced on 
account of land required for ranges there, as the land for that has to be a 
compact block in a safe area and not scattered pockets in various stations. 


(b) A Force 


Requirements Area (in acres) 
(i) Offices, Housing and other related 3,220 
facilities. 
(ii) Storage of all kind 400 
(iii) Training inclusive of testing of arms/ 23,740 
ammunition etc. 
(iv) Operational and other allied purposes. 6,170 
Total : 33,530 
(c) Navy 
Requirements Area (in acres) 
(i) Housing and related facilities 500 
(ii) For other operational purposes 1200 
including storage, depots and yards. 
(iii) For training purposes 800 
Total : 2500 


(d) Ordnance Factories 


Deptt. of Defence Production & Supplies has reported that the current 
shortfall of land is 100 acres for housing and related facilities. 


(2) Other users like DRDO, NCC etc., have not reported any shortfall. 
Ceiling on Land Holdings 


1. When enquired as to whether it is possible and also practicable, to 
consider establishing a ceiling on the total defence land holdings, the 
Ministry in a note have explained as follows: 


४ 4 parallel with the concept of a ceiling on manpower, or a ceiling on 
Force leve, cannot be essily drawn in respect of the land holdings. With 
the technological advancements weapons and equipments tend to become 
obsolete and depreciate. Some of them can not even be disposed of. Even 
an effective life-span on 10 to 15 years is unlikely for most of the weapon 
systems and equipments in today’s modernisation momentum. During this 
process of .modernisation some systems are discarded and some new 
systems are introduced. Even when operating within a given Force level, it 
is possible to re-equip/operate a system better, with modernisation: As 
weapons and equipments become less man-power oriented : more 
autometic and robot/computer-controlled, it may be reasonable to expect 
that the annual wastages of man-power are replenished by personnel of 


6 


higher skills, and that the existing manpower released from phased out 
weapons and equipments are retrained for better skills. Weapons, 
equipment and manpower are mobile, and can be deployed generally, 
wherever warranted, depending on the changing scenario and theatre of 
action. But. lands and buildings are not mobile hence readjustments cannot 
be made in a comparable way. 


(2) The quick reaction required from the Forces and their rapid 
deployment require that they should be quartered, 0 re-deployed, at 
certain locations which might warrant change with the re-deployment of 
the Adversary’s Forces. Since the existing holdings of lands and buildings 
cannot be moved, those have to be left behind or have to be left for 
occupation by other units. Certain new locations have to be occupied 
temporarily or permanently. Hence, development of the new locations 
cannot be ruled out even when the manpower and the Force remain at the 
same levels. This is a handicap due to the immobility of the asset of lands 
and buildings. Even with the same Force level, for establishing the 
network of rader and communication facilities additional sites and locations 
have to be developed. 


(3) Development of tactical doctrines and changing strategic perceptions 
might warrant more lands even for the same force level and manpower. 
When the concept of the integrated training of men and weapons was 
extended, over a period, for larger Formations like Brigade, Division, 
Corps and even Army, for battle-innoculation and for perfecting the 
tactical doctrines, large ranges became necessary again as notice. the 
changes that had become necessary for housing aircraft, dispersals. 
runways etc. warranted additional land for the same combat Force level. 
Moving from the concept of a short duration war that has been the basis of 
our planning from the experiences of India-Pak and the Middle East Wars 
of the 60/70s, in the context of the Iran-Iraq War of the 80s which lasted 
over 9 years, now we may have to be prepared for a situation of a conflict 
of longer duration. With this, the stock holding of ammunitions, POL, 
Supplies etc. and the safety zones for the higher holding have also gone 
up. The larger safety zones for the ammunition depots holding higher 
stocks or categories of explosive warrant large-areas to be left vacant. 


No station can be developed in Jess that 10 to 15 years time from taking 
over the land even if resources are provided. Hence, relinquishing a station 
permanently even as the Forces move to new locations, but remaining 
within the Force level ceiling and reducing the land holdings cannot be met 
within such a time-frame. It will therefore not be realistic to put a ceiling 
on the holdings within which the Services should be made to operate.” 


Norms of Land Holdings 
1.7 In ४ written note to the Committee the Ministry of Defence stated 


that for meeting the requirements of various types of Units. there are 
given scales of authorisation for office/housing/storage accommodation 


4 


and for training purpose. Scales of land authorised for certain categories of 
units are given in a Table of Norms of land holdings for various types of 
units of the Army laid down by the QMG in 1947. 


In this connection the Ministry clarified that the land authorisation scales 
for various units are the same, whether the station is a Cantonment or a 


Military Station 


It was further stated that the scales for land used for various types of 
units were laid down in 1947. After a review in 1972, as an economy 
measure, it was decided to impose a 33% cut on the entitled scales while 
finalising the requirement of lands for various types of Units at anv 
Station. As a further economy measure it has now been recognised that 
the cut may be raised to 41.8% and orders in this regard are expected to 
be issued shortly. 


1.8 Army HQrs have constituted a Study Team with the Dy. QMG as 
Chairman and with representatives of DGMT, 8००1). DG(Qtg), DGDE, 
Addl. DG (Financial Planning), Additional DG (Military Farms), DG 
Ordnance Services and E-in-C to examine the existing land norms, to 
revise it suitably taking into account the present pressure on land to 
identify surplus lands including lands which may be available as a result of 
closure of Military Farms and to examine the need for minimum 
inescapable requirement of ranges in various areas. 


1.9 The Committee during evidence, desired to know why ad-hoc cuts 
were being applied and whether there was no way of working out a 
rational scale for determining the land requirements of the three Services. 
In this connection, the Secrefary Ministry of Defence during evidence 
stated as follows:— 


“The Army Chief, in consultation with us because of their concern 
and our concern had set up a Committee on the 20th August, 1990 
which is currently functioning. We are awaiting the 
recommendations and the report of this Committee. We are in a 
rush, ag such, to impose the cuts in an ad-hoc manner. The 
Menistry ‘of Defence is pursuing this matter with the service 
Headquarters, to ensure that if there are any surplus lands or 
unused lands available then those lands should be first put to use 
for new requirements. The earlier priveleges which we enjoyed 40 
years ago, to have single level structures and a density of 11/2 or 2 
persons per acre, is no longer available to us and that is why, the 
Army and other Services have agreed to a reduction of 33 per 
cent. There is a need to ensure that unused lands are not held 
without justification. Our intention is not to proceed in a haste. 
Our intention is to compact the use of all available lands, compact 
the location of structures and services as that itself will mean 
controlling/curtailing additional costs which accrue when the entire 
services are spread over a lagre area, the road system, 


2148LS-4 


8 


illumination, etc. The Army is agreeable to a cut being imposed. 
We are trying to optimise on resources.” 


1.10 The Ministry of Defence vide their communication dated the 17th 
June, 1991 forwarded a copy of the order relating to revised land norms 
issued in February, 1991 stating inter alia as follows:— 


“the revised norms of land requirement will amount to a cut of 
4T:8% on the norms laid down in the 1947 Handbook as against 
the ad-hoc cut of 33% imposed since 1972. These revised norms 
will apply in the case of assessment of land requirement for a new 
station as will as in assessing the total land requirement of an 
existing station whenever additional land is required for such an 
existing station. However, these revised norms will not be applied 
in case of land acquired for an existing station prior to 1972.” 


Reorganisation of Ranges 

1.11 Field firing ranges, acquired or notified, ee the basic tool 
for training of troops. Training of troops to erSure accurate use: of 
weapons and realistic combined arms team manoeuvre can best be done 
only on field firing ranges. The formations and units of the Army have so 
far been conducting field firing and battle inoculation in the acquired 
ranges as well as ranges notified by the States under the Manoeuvre Field 
Firing and Artillery Practice Act, 1938, However, denotification and non- 
renewal of notification of ranges by some State Governments have resulted 
in adversely affecting the training schedules of many formations and units 


Proposal for Rationalisation of Ranges 


1.12 Having due regard to the State Governments difficulties regarding 
notification of existing ranges due to pressure of population, requirement 
of land for modern intensive agriculture ‘and other developmental 
activities, a detailed review of the Army’s requirement of ranges in its. 
entirety was carried out during 1985-86 to rationalise their use and to 
achieve optimal training output. The aim of the exercise was to arrive at 
an acceptable course of action wherein neither the developmental activities 
‘of the States nor the minimum training requirement of the Army were to 
be affected. 

Rationalisation | 

1.13 The requirement of field firing ranges was examined in detail and 
out of the total of 90 ranges of various categories in use at that time, a 
total of 8 Category I and 22 Category II ranges were proposed to be 
acquired. The proposal was accepted by the Ministry of Defence in May 
1986, after carrying out an indepth analysis at various levels. It was 
decided that each Command and three Major training institutions i.e 
College of Combat, Armoured Corps Centre and School and School of 
Artillery should have one Category I range (suitable for all weapons) and 
each Division, as far as possible, should have one Category II range 


9 


(suitable for all weapons less heavy artillery) so that field firing could be 
conducted in the ranges throughout the year. However, it was emphasised 
that in order to continue with the training requirements or the Army, the 
notified range will continue to be so utilised till the acquisition of all the 
proposed ranges is complete. 


1.14 The guideliness followed for selection of these ranges are as 
follows:— 


(a) The range area should preferably comprise rugged, barren, 
unproductive and non-agricultural land. 


(b) The area chosen should be away from habitation and be 
undeveloped/ underdeveloped. 


(c) As far as possible, the acquired ranges should be based on of around 
the existing ranges. 


1.15 The Army needs ranges lest the standards in training are diluted 
and thereby the operational preparedness compromised. The Army has also 
issued instructions to all Headquarters Commands for initiating 
denotification process in respect of those ranges which have not been in 
active use and are not likely to be uséd in future. Till such time the 
acquisition process for the selected ranges is complete, it is necessary fo 
ehsure smooth periodic notification of the ranges currently in use. Any 
Melay by the State Governments in renotifying the ranges will severly affect 
the Army’s training schedule 


1.16 When the Category I and Category II ranges (i.e. a total of 
8+22=30 ranges) are acquired, a total range area of over 15.00 lakh acres, 
as detailed below, could be diverted from ranges for other purposes:-- 


(a) Total Area of 90 Ranges as of today — 34,21,946 acres. 


(b) 8 Category I Ranges proposed for — J§,81,189 acres. 
acquisition. Total area 

(c) 22 Category II Ranges proposed for — 9,81,751 acres. 
acquisition. § Total area 

(d) Total area of 30 Ranges — 18,62,940 acres. 

(९) Surplus Range area. —- 15,59,006 acres. 


1.17 Large funds would be required for the acquisition of area for the 
proposed 30 ranges. During the current year, there is a provision of only 
Rs. 17.00 crores for the acquisition of land for all different purposes, 
including land required for ranges. This year there are no funds available 
from the sanctioned budget for acquisition of ranges. It would, therefore, 
be many years before funds could be found to acquire the land for the 
proposed ranges. 


1.18 The Navy does not have any field firing range on land. 
1.19 As far as the Air Force. is concerned, their firing ranges are ail 


10 


unidirectional. The Air Force has projected a need for 3 multi-directional 
ranges of which one has been proposed at Nohar in Sriganganagar District, 
Rajasthan, with an area of 19,470 acres. Establishment of these three 
ranges is expected to result in some of the existing ranges being given up, 
and the new ranges being located closer to existing operational squadrons. 
This matter is presently under the consideration of the Ministry of 
Defence. 


1.20 In regard to identifying the areas for reorganisation of ranges from 
90 to 30 and treatment of areas that would be rendered surplus on 
reorganisation of ranges the Secretary, Ministry of Defence stated during 
evidence: — 


‘““We have identified the lands for reorganising these Ranges. Till 
we reorganise these Ranges, we will continue to use that land.” 


The DGDE added : 


“Most*of the ranges are notified ranges, we do not own the land 
there. The State Government has notified the land for us. They 
say that for certain days of the year you do the firing there and 
you compensate for the damage done the disturbance caused to the 
people. So, when we get away from those ranges, actually we are 
not going to get any surplus land. If we have our own ranges, they 
can be used for about 300 days or so in a year.” 


1.21 On enquirying to whether all the sixty ranges proposed to be given 
up on reogranisation were notified ranges, DGDE replied in the 
affirmative. = 


1.22 On the ongoing exercise for reogranisation of Ranges, the DGDE 
stated : 


“In fact, the position is that we had started this exercise about a 
year ago, starting with the Army, because the largest ground was 
required by Army. We have made some headway so far as the 
Army is concerned. The Director-General of Military Training is in 
touch with the National Airport Authority of India. We are going 
to have a similar exercise done in respect of Air Force. Some work 
has started but we have still to formalise the whole thing. The 
Navy also has certain presence on the ground which is not so 
extensive as in the case of the Air Force and the Army. It is third 
in the descending ००८.” 


1.23 In response to a specific query whether the Ministry of Defence 
would consider the setting up of a special tram with a very tight time- 
bound programme.-for the purpose (for range reorganisation for all the 
three Services). The Secretary replied:— 


“No problem, Sir.”’ 


11 


1.24 In this connection, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Defence, 
informed: 


“I would apprise the Committee of another development. The 
Minister of State for Forests and Environment had a meeting and 
the consensus that emerged in the meeting was that to solve the 
forest problems, they should try to identify barren and waste, 
which if acceptable to the Arnly, they should take over and 
surrender the notified areas. The second decision was that there 
should be more intensive use of the existing areas of the ranges so 
that no more areas need be taken.” 


He further stated: 


‘There are so many problems. There are so many ranges. Most of 
the ranges do have a part of the forest land. Most of the areas are 
not inhabited.” 


1.25 Clarifying the position regarding surplus area on reorganisation of 
ranges, the Ministry of Defence in a subsequent note stated as follows: 


‘It may be indicated that, on acquiring 30 ranges (8 category I and 
22 category II ranges) with a total area of 18,62,940 acres, an area 
of 15,59,006 acres would become surplus. This area of 15,59,006 
acres, which forms part of the notified ranges, would not be 
required after the 30 permanent ranges are established through 
land acquisition. These lands are not, today, held on acquisition/ 
hiring/requisition. These are all private/State Government lands. 
We are not now liable to pay any rent or any other recurring 
payment. When it is released from the notification, the land will be 
available to the owners for their uninterrupted use. This is an 
economical arrangement for the Army, because we do not have to 
make any capital investment for this and recurring compensation, 
for the occupation of the whole site for the whole year 15 also not 
paid. The financial liability now is limited only to compensation for 
any damage done during the period of firing. 


As against this, when 30 ranges are set up on defence-owned land, 
considerable capital investment in the form of acquisition costs for the 
lands will have to be made. Financial resources for acquisition of all the 
sites are not likely to be available in the forseeable future. Therefore, 
notified ranges will continue to be in use for many more years to come.” 


Notification of Ranges 
1.26 Explaining the position regarding notification of ranges, the 


Quartermaster General, Army Headquarters, stated during evidence on 4 
January, 1991: 


“The. ranges are notified from year to year. However, we are in 
favour of long term notification, otherwise the ranges are not 


12 


available for much of the time. Secondly, once denotification takes 
place, every year, we have to go back to the State Government for 
notification. 


We had a Committee to look into it and the matter is still under 
consideration. For the interim period certain decisions had been 
taken. Today, we have 94 ranges all over the country. We would 
be able to release a large chunk of the area, but that is only 
notional. But to acquire 30 ranges, we do not have enough money. 
A via media that has been suggested is that we get a long term 
notification of these ranges with whatever little restrictions.” 


National Test Range 
1.27 The Ministry of Defence stated that : 


‘There is requirement of a substantial area for a National Test 
Range for which the original selection was 37,386 acres of land in 
the Baliapal Complex in Balasore, Orissa. This will be an 
instrumented range necessary for testing of weapons and 
equipment under development and the tactical doctrine under 
evolution in the changing scenarios.” a 


1.28 Enquired whether National Test Range was responsibility of the 
Ministry of Defence, the Secretary replied: 


“Yes, Sir, it is.” ae. 


1.29 Asked whether the Ministry would continue with this responsibility 
or would they like it to be handed over to ISRO or some other 
organisation, the Defence Secretary stated: 


“In fact, this concept of NTR was not something exclusive to the 
Ministry of Defence, it was to subserve the purpose of the 
Department of Space, which sends out various kinds of vehicles 
into space. There was an Expert Committee set up, quite some 
years ago, under the Chairmanship of the present Minister of State 
for Defence, Dr. Raja Ramanna. It had representatives from the 
three Services, Department of Space, and other Scientific and 
Technical bodies. They went into all the technical not merely 
physical requirements of space of how much area is required to 
undertake this or that kind of test. They came up with a series of 
recommendations after seeing the possibility on the ground of what 
was possible. I would submit that the NTR is not meant merely for 
the use of the Army or the Air Force. It is to be used for flight 
testing of rockets and missiles of various ranges and capabilities at 
10 to 250 kms. range.” 


13 


1.30 Explaining the rational for selecting Baliapal as the site for National 
rest Range. The Defence Secretary stated: 


“There is a requirement of extremely protected firing area for day- 
to-day use and then we also have the inescapable requirement of 
providing testing of rockets which are productionised by our 
Defence Public Sector production units or by the Ordnance 
Factories or both of them in collaboration with the private sector. 
Like-wise, we require facilities for evaluation of rockets and 
missiles, flight evaluation of range technology of systems like the 
Agni which has the capabilities of 200 to 2000 kms. and so on, 
besides, the launching of satellites by the Department of Space. 
Briefly without going into details, I would submit that the scientific 
requirements take into account the orbit, the axis, that is, whether 
it is, North-South or East-West in terms of gravitational pulls, they 
look for an area-specially as a missile has to go fairly high in the 
space, which is subject to atmospheric disturbances in most parts of 
the year, what is the monsoon period in that area, how shallow the 
coastline is, etc. A combination of factors led to the identification 
of low sea-line area which is, preferably, crescent shaped and 
opened out into a sea which is not, at the moment, suffering from 
enormous air or sea traffic, so that when the testing has to be 
done, on projectiles or missiles, which go beyond a certain 
elevation in the sky or beyond a certain disturbance along the sea 
there will be minimal need to close sea or air traffic of an 
international kind. So they came to such a pass which has been 
debated in the last few years. And one other very important factor 
was that once you have fired a misile on a journey up into the 
atmosphere on its return journey its entire movement has to be 
monitored by ground stations or stations in the sea. Floating 
stations of Indian Navy or other organisation, scientific vessels to 
get a complete feedback date on how it performed. It was found, 
over a period of time, m the process of elimination that this was 
the only area, the Balasore area.” 


1.31 He further added: 


““How, on the one side the requirement is there which we have 
been discussing, and on the other side we have ee areas 
dispersed all over the country of surplus air fields and ‘other areas 
which do not match for the simple reason that we have to have an 
outlet on the sea and we have to have a certain ground facility 
which has a fairly large requirement of land. So, NTR is something 
inescapable, which has to be there for scientific reasons and how 
soon we will be able to resolve the matter which has been pursued 
by the Department of Defence Research for the last seven years 
now, still remains to be seen. Because there is a let of opposition 


14 


from the population actually on the ground in the area proposed to 
be taken over. Some part has been taken over, some facilities have 
already been set up on the ground and from Balasore we. are 
already operating—in fact Agni’s firing was done from Balasore. 
The local Government has not been particularly happy with the 
pursuit of this project. So, it has been in some kind of suspended 
animation in the last few years. But I would submit that NTR is a 
necessity which cannot be given up for strictly high priority 
scientific and defence consideration.” 


1.32 As regards sharing of financial burden, the Secretary of the 
Ministry stated: 


“Once everything is sorted out, I would see no difficulty of our 
apportioning the total initial cost and recurring costs as between us 
and the other concerned Departments. I don’t think that the issue 
has been debated in the past, but I shall see that whatever is done 
in future will be utilised by multiple agencies. If it is not entirely 
for the Defence Ministry, the burden, will have to be shar 


1.33 The Committee during evidence, referred to land in Siliguri by the 
Defence authorities in 1948 on lease. In 1987, the lease period expired but 
the Army had not vacated the land. The Committee enquired whether it 
was a very healthy proposition to retain that land without a prior 
notification when the lease had expired. 


In reply, the Quartermaster General, Army Headquarters stated: 


“What happens is that, normally in the operational situation, 
sometime, the Forces have to move into a particular sector in 
respect of a threat..In most of the areas, there is hardly any 
population, hardly any inhabitation and the operational 
requirements demands us to have the ground prepared at the 
shortest possible time. I hope, lateron, as the time goes by, the 
movement of population also starts in the wake of army and the 
people then start realising that the land which is in occupation of 
the Army, could get compensation to them. This has been the case 
in J&K, Punjab, Rajasthan and all the border States, where 
induction of the Army precedes induction of the civil population. 
We are resolving this problem. Where such cases are coming up, 
we are looking into them and paying compensation.” 

1.34 In response to a query regarding acquiring this plot of land, the 

witness replied: 
“We keep this land on lease.” 
Conclusions 


The Committee note that Defence land holdings have increased four-fold : 
since 1960. As against 5.84 lakh acres of land held by Defence Services as 
on 1.1.1960, the total holdings at the end of 1969 were 22.16 lakh acres. 


15 


This includes 96,000 acres of land hired or requisitioned for Defence 
purposes. 

1.36 The Ministry of Defence have attributed the many-fold increase in 
Defence land holdings broadly to increased presence of Defence forces on 
Western borders in the wake of two wars fought in 1965 and 1971 and to 
the presence of Super-power in Indian Ocean and imperatives of defending 
country’s Island territories and its Exclusive Economic Zone. The 
Committee further note that as a consequence of these changes in the 
national security environment, the Armed Forces had to be augmented and 
modernised. With the implementation of re-equipment plans involving 
induction of weapon systems of greater fire power and longer range and 
with the re-deployment of fighting formations, the land requirements of 
Defence Services have continued to grow year after year. 


1.37 The Committee find that Army are the major land user and account 
for 18.45 lakh acres while Navy and Air Force together occupy only 1.96 
lakh acres. The other users of Defence land include the Ordnance Factories, 
Defence Research and Development Organisation, Directorate-General 
(Quality Assurance), Defence Accounts Department, Cantonment Boards 
and the Defence Estates Organisation. In fact, the lands which are 
temporarily surplus to other organisations are being kept in reserve for 
future defence use, as also the lands held as grants or on lease by private 
parties, rest in the custody of Defence Estates Organisation. The total land 
under the management of various Cantonment Boards is 11,350 acres. Most 
of this land is used either for Defence purposes or for housing troops and 
their families and includes lands given on grants/lease in notified civil and 
bazar areas within the Cantonments. 


1.38 The Committee note that lands held by the Defence Services are 
mainly used for (i) housing and other related facilities, (ii) training areas 
and establishments, (iii) storage depots and yards (iv) testing arms, 
ammunitions and explosives. They, however, find that verified details of 
land required under each of these categories is not readily available with the 
Ministry of Defence. Consequently the Committee are unable to ascertain 
the short-fali of land required under different categories. 


Recomuinendation 


The Committee cannot comprehend how any meticulously planning in 
respect of acquisition of land for defence purposes can be done in the 
absence of relevant basic data. They, therefore, consider it desirable that 
appropriate action is taken to maintain such data. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry in this behalf. 


Conclusions 


1.39 The Committee note that all the Army Commands have projected 
additional requirement for land totalling 2,20,907 acres, of which 1,29,402 
acres are required for different categories of ranges and the balance for Key 


21460 5.5 


16 


Location Plans (KLP). In addition to this the Air Force and Navy and other 
users of lands under the Ministry of Defence require 36,130 acres of land. 
The Committee are also apprised that only Southern Army Command have 
indicated surplus land to the extent of 35,044 acres. 


1.40 The Committee are further informed that even though the Force 
levels may be subject to a ceiling, the need for new locations and more land 
for defence purposes cannot be obviated owing to changes in the strategic 
perceptions, deployment pattern of the Forces and the development of 
tactical doctrines. Therefore, a ceiling on land holdings within which the 
Defence Services might be made to operate cannot be a realistic answer to 
the problem of land availability. 


1.41 In this context, the Committee note that Cantonment/Military 
Stations and other establishments of the Defence Services are governed by 
Land Norms laid down in 1947. As an economy measure, these Norms were 
reviewed in 1972 and an ad hoc cut of 33% on the entitled scales of land 
imposed. On the basis of the recommendations of the Committee constituted 
by the Chief of Army staff in 1990 these Norms have further been revised 
by imposing an additional cut of 8% over the existing scales of entitlement 
for determining the optimal authorisation of land for any establishment. 


Recommendation 


1.42 Keeping in view the high cost of creating additional infrastructure 
and the need for optimal utilisation of existing resources, the Committee feel 
that it is essential that the scales of land authorisation for different types of 
units of establishments of Defence Services are fixed taking into account 
present realities in regard to land use and availability in the country. The 
Committee, therefore, welcome the revision of Land Norms and hope that 
these norms will be kept under review on a periodic basis. 


1.43 Some of the Cantonments have been encircled by dense urban 
agglomeration which, as it is, need appropriate lung spaces. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend a cautious and selective approach in 
enforcing the proposed cut in regard to such Cantonments. They would 
expect the defence authorities to lia:se with their counterparts in the civilian 
administration for this purpose. 


Conclusions 


1.44 The Committee note that field firing is an essential tool for training 
and battle inoculation of the troops. They further note that Army and Air 
Force carry out field firing in about 90 ranges which have been notified by 
various State Governments under the Manoeuvres, Field Firing and 
Artillery Practice Act, 1938. The land falling under these ranges is either 
owned by the State Governments or by the private parties. 


1.45 The Committee are informed that owing to land being progressively 
brought under intensive agriculture use and for other development 
activities, the State Governments have been finding it difficult to issue 


17 


necessary notifications in regard to these ranges. A comprehensive review of 
Army’s requirement of ranges was, therefore, carried out during 1985-86 
with a view to rationalising the use of existing ranges and to achieve optimal 
training output. After an indepth analysis, at various levels, of the proposals 
resulting from this review it was decided by the Ministry of Defence in May, 
1986 to scale down its requirement from existing 90 ranges to 30 which 
include 8 category I ranges (suitable for all weapons) and 22 Category II 
ranges (suitable for all weapons except heavy artillery). The Committee. 
however, note that as these 30 ranges would be subject to use throughout 
the year a total of additional 9.24 lakh acres of land is required to be 
acquired by the Ministry. On the other hand 15.59 lakh acres would be left 
completely free for the uninterrupted use of civilian population. The 
Committee find that large resources will be required to acquire additional 
land for implementing the proposed reorganisation of field firing ranges. 
They also note that in many cases the State Governments have either 
refused outright to give ‘no objection certificates’ or shown reluctance to do 
so. At the same time many State Governments have either denotified some 
of the existing ranges or have been delaying renewal of notifications. The 
Committee are informed that this is going to severely affect the training 
schedule of the Army. The Committee are also aware that some of the 
existing ranges are proving to be inadequate owing to induction of new 
weapon system and that need is being felt by IAF for multi-directional firing 
ranges which necessarily involves large tracts of land. The Committee 
therefore conclude that acquisition of more land for setting up permanent 
ranges does not appear to be feasible in the immediate future. At the same 
time it cannot be vouch safe that such ranges once acquired will not fall 
short of requirements of the Army or Air Force at a later stage. 
Nevertheless, acquisition of permanent ranges seem to be desirable keeping 
in view the difficulties which are being faced in renewing the notification of 
existing ranges or in getting new ranges notified. It has been suggested to 
the Committee that a via media could be found by amplifying Manoeuvres, 
Field Firing and Artillery Practice Act, 1938 so as to ensure that ranges are 
notified for longer durations and to give Central Government powers to 
issue directives to the State Governments in this regard. 


Recommendations 


1.46 The Committee are of the opinion that from a long term perspective 
the Ministry must acquire as many permanent ranges as it can afford and 
the circumstances permit. They desire that a long term programme of land 
acquisition may be drawn and implemented for this purpose. However, at 
the same time the Committee quite clearly see the usefulness of carrying out 
the suggested amplifications in the Manoeuvres, Field Firing and Artillery 
Practice Act, 1938. The Committee are of the firm view that these 
amendments will not only ease the problem of the Army in the immediate 
context but will also provide necessary leeway for rationalisation of the 
ranges at a future date if so warranted by the requirements of the training. 


18 


1.47 The Committee further feel that with the existing procedure it might 
take an unduly long time to complete the identification and acquisition of 
land for organisation of ranges. They, therefore, recommend that a Special 
Team may be constituted for reorganisation of ranges for the Services so 
that it addresses itself to the totality of the problem from identification to 
acquisition. 


1.48 National Test Range is a vital requirement of the country. 
Unfortunately, for one reason or another the question of its acquisition has 
been dragging on for the past many years. The Committee desire that 
position may be reviewed, at appropriately high level, to resolve this 
problem through mutual discussion amongst all parties concerned. 


1.49 Apart from the Defence Services, National Test Range is being 
utiised also by the other agencies of the Government. They are, therefore, 
of the view that if this range is going to be used by various other agencies to 
a substantial extent, then the expenses of acquisition and its maintenance 
should not be left to be borne entirely by Ministry of Defence, the resources 
of which are already scarce. The Committee desire that the cost of 
acquiring and maintaining National Test Range should be shared by users 
on a proportionate basis or through some practicable formula. 


1.50 Under the Manoeuvres, Field Firing and Artillery Practice Act, 1938 
Army are not liable to pay any rent or any other recurring payment to the 
land owners for conducting field firing in the notified ranges which are 
either private or State Government lands. The Committee consider this a 
legacy of colonial rule. They recommend that the Government should give a 
tair deal to the land holders who are forcibly dispossesed for a specified 
duration of the year and give them due compensation including damages for 
crops. The: Committee urge that for this purpose, if necessary, relevant 
amendments may be carried out in the Act in consultation with the State 
Governments. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken 
by the Government in this regard. 


1.51 The Committee note that there have been instances where the 
Ministry of Defence have failed to take timely action in issuing the necessary 
notification for continuing temporary occupation of land on lease which has 


minimum so as to avoid harassment to the land owners. 
Recommendation 


1.52 The Committee recommend that where Defence Services intend to 
extend occupetion of any land for a further specific period adequate notice 
should be given to the affected parties. They expect sUch cases to be 
duly monitored by DGOE. 


CHAPTER II 
LAND USE 
Utilisation Pattern 
2.1 The Committee desired to know how much of the total approximate 
22.16 lakh acres of defence land held, was utilised for— 
(i) housing and other related facilities, 
(ii) training areas and establishments, 
(iii) storage, depots and yards, and 
(iv) testing of arms/ammunitions/explosives. 


In a wnitten note the Ministry of Defence explained: 


“The available land records do not show category-wise utilisation for 
housing or other related activities. However, the broad details of the lands 
under occupation of the Army who are the major users of land are as 
below: 


(a) Key Location Plan (KLP) 3.25 lakh acres. 
(b) (i) Training areas including field firing 8.93 lakh acres. 
ranges 
(ii) Small arms/grenade ranges 0.23 lakh acres. 
(c) Other establishments like Storage/Depot/ 
Workshops/Camping Grounds 6.04 lakh acres. 


No such details in respect of Navy/Air Force have been furnished. 


(2) Apart from the lands used by the three Services, certain lands shown 
on the charge of the Defence Estates Officers and the Cantonment Boards 
are used for housing and other facilities. These are held on grants/leases. 
Some other areas are used by the Cantonment Boards for municipal 
purposes. 

(3) The land holding of 33,603 acres held by DGQA are all used for 
testing of arms/ammunitions/explosives, and are at the Central Proof 
Range Itarsi, Khamaria and Jabalpur. This testing is with reference to the 
production of the OFBs. The user’s testing/evaluation of the items are 
held at their ranges which are otherwise for training purposes. Part of the 
holding of the DRDO to the extent of 2392 acres is also the Interim Test 
Range at Chandipore, Orissa.” 


19 


20 


Lands net under active use of Defence Services 


2.2 Those lands which are not entrusted to any of the three Services or 
other Users, for their active use are held in the custody of Defence Estate 
Organisation (DEO). These lands measuring 60,828 acres comprise the 
following:— 


(i) Lands under forest in the hill Cantonments of Dalhousie, 
Bakloh, Kasauli, Dagshai, Jautogh Subhatha, Landour, 
Lansdowns, Ranikhet, Almora, Nainital, Jalapahar, Lebong, 
Pachhmarhi etc. On these hills these forests are the real green- 
tops. These now remain the ecological and environmental asset of 
the nation and there is no question of changing the land utilisation, 
pattern. Further, the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 debars any 
change in the use of these lands. 


(ii) All the sites on grants and leases in the bungalow areas of all 
the 62 Cantonments. 


(iii) The lung spaces left as un-built or un-buildable in the 
Cantonments. 


(iv) Many of the old Camping grounds and abandoned airfields, 
which Army/Air Force have handed over as surplus. 


Grass Birs 


2.3 The Ministry of Defence clarified that some open ५४105 with the 
Users are also not available for active use. For example approximately 
72,000 acres of land forming the grass-birs at Gwalior (that accrued to the 
Army with the integration of the Gwalior State Forces) had been with the 
Military Farms till two years back. Thereafter, it has been with other 
Army Units at the station. This is the natural habitat of the Indian 
Bustard. The site was used to a limited extent for firing in 1984-85. It 
cannot be used as a range or for construction of accommodation and 
remains for environmental protec‘ion. 


2.4 Enquired how much money was being spent on grass-birs forest area 
in Gwalior, DGDE stated during evidence: 


“On this 72,000 acres, which is the grass-birs, we hardly spend 
anything. On the forest area, we spend some money for keeping 
some Forest Guards and Mallis to plant seedlings.” 


2.5 In response to a query, the representative of the Ministry of Defence 
informed that there were no villages in those forests. 


2:6 The Committee pointed out that either the Ministry of Defence 
should hand over the land to the Ministry of Environment and Forests to 
handle or the Ministry of Defence should properly maintain it by asking 


21 


the Government for appropriate funds for this purpose. To this Secretary, 
Ministry of Defence, stated: 


“Wherever we are holding lands for whatever historical reasons, 
either protected forests or classified forests, we are not allowed to 
use such lands but we are allowed merely to protect them. Then, 
your question is why the Ministry of Defence has to spend 
anything at all to protect these lands which is not its primary role 
and why these should not be handed over. We accept this. We will 
negotiate with the Ministry of Environment and Forests and see 
how we can deal with the large tract of the grass-birs and the 
classified forests that we have in and around Dalhousie and in 
several other areas in the UP hills. I would submit that when we 
do that, if there are any small pockets where we have been 
allowed even partial use, we will continue to bear the expenses. 
On some basic understanding as to what should or should not 
come up in that area, once we have handed it over to the State or 
the Central authority, we will definitely examine this in a serious 
manner in conjunction with the concerned authorities and see what 
best can be done.” 


Unused Lands 


2.7 Some old Camping Grounds (approx., area 4300 acres), some old 
abandoned Air Fields (approx. area 18,200 acres) and encroached land 
(approx., area 4000 acres) which are included in the lands not under active 
use have been lying unused geneially since the early fifties. 


2.8 According to Ministry of Defence many of the unused camping 
grounds had been on agricultural leases through the Collectors till the mid 
50s, when these sites were taken over from the State Governments by the 
Defence Estates Organisation. All the camping grounds/unused airfields 
which could be put to agricultural purposes were given on temporary leases 
for that purpose. Some of the airfields were also used by Rehabilitation 
Department, the Food Corporation of India etc. when they had urgent 
need for land for their activities. The Ministry also informed the 
Committee that ownership of some of these lands by Ministry of Defence 
had been disputed by the respective State Governments. The market 
values of these sites has not been estimated. 


2.9 The Committee enquired whether the Ministry of Defence 
considered disposing of these unused land. In their note, the Ministry have 
stated: 


“The Ministry of Defence considered disposing of the surplus 
camping grounds/abandoned airfields. For this a policy was laid 
down in September 1977. While action to dispose of the sites was 
being processed for sanction, the then RM took the view that 
because of the increasing paucity of land and growing unwillingness 
of the State Governments to issue NOCs, “no defence land may be 


22 


declared, surplus; land may be given up only on the basis of 
exchange and on no other basis; the expanding need of the 
Defence Forces will require a lot of land and, may be, the present 
holdings will be just adequate”. In July 86, it was decided by the 
then RRM that: ‘No defence land shall be declared surplus. If at 
all any land is given up it should be only on the basis of exchange. 
However, the demands of the State Government/Central 
Government as well as of Public Sector Undertakings/Companies/ 
Enterprises under their control may be considered on the merits of 
each case.’ 


Only lands for which there was no alternative defence use were declared 
as surplus camping ground/abandoned airfield. 


“None of the said sites fall within the limits of Contonment Boards; 
some fall within Municipalities. The Policy, as laid down, permitted 
exchange of these sites for alternative lands suitable for defence purposes 
and for transfer to Central/State Government Departments/ undertakings, 
at market value. Despite circulating lists of sites to the Chief Secretaries of 
the State Governments in August 1986, there has been no response/ 
demand. However, separately, the West Bengal Government had 
requested for the Chara Air Field (616.94 acres) for re-establishing a PAC 
Campus. It has been decided to transfer the land to the State Government 
at the negotiated price of Rs. 46.13 lakhs.” 


2.10 Explaining the position on additional land holdings, the Secretary, 
Ministry of Defence during his evidence before the Committee, stated: 


“J do admit that we have a situation which is dynamic and, on one 
side we have large holdings and side by side, we have pockets of 
surplus lands or areas which are little more than pockets, which 
are no longer required because of the very substantial changes in 
the very functioning of the Defence Services, equipments that they 
hold, their battle philosophy and such other factors. We have 
almost a continuous demand for additional requirements to be 
met. Prima facie, it may anpear that we have large holdings, we 
have pockets of surplus land and yet we keep on acquiring large 
pockets of additional land. I would briefly mention that what we 
inherited, in 1947, largely remains with us and because of the 
changed situation in the country, geo-politically and otherwise, we 
have found that certain holdings are no longer relevant to the 
current requirements of the Services. 


It has also been felt both by the Services and the Ministry, as well 
as the valuable observations made by the erstwhile Committees of 
Parliament that in view of the enormous increase of population in 
the country in all parts, the progressive increase in land values, 
progressively increasing use of lands being made cultivable, we 
should do all that is possible to ensure against any frivolous or 


23 


unjustified acquisition. That process has been continuously on and 
the Government is monitoring the situation.” 


2.11 In regard to the disposal of 22 abandoned airfields, the Ministry of 
Defence in their note furnished after evidence stated as follows: 


“Out of these, Pandaveswar airfield and Charra airfield have 
already been transferred to the Eastern Coal Fields Ltd., Burd- 
wan/Government of West Bengal, respectively, on payment of 
market value. Airfields at Jhingura, Kasia and Prithiganj are also 
under consideration for transfer to the Government of U.P. 


The question of disposal of abandoned airfields was considered in 
an internal meeting in the Ministry of Defence on 28 December 
1990. It was felt that all the three Defence Services should review 
their plans and examine whether any of these abandoned airfields 
would be required to be retained for defence purposes. After a 
clear picture emerges, the issue of disposal of the remaining 
abandoned airfields would be settled.” 


Old Grants 


2.12 Administrative permission for occupation of lands (which came into 
the hands of the Government by right of conquest or Treaty with the then 
ruler, or an payment of compensation in the 18th and the major part of the 
19th Century), granted by the Officer Commanding Station, QMG’s 
Branch, the C-in-C and the Government before the scheme of leases were 
introduced, from 1899, are known as old Grants. These are not restricted 
to the permissions granted in pursuance of the later GGO No. 179 of 1836 
brought into force in the territory of Bengal Presidency and the similar 
GGOs applicable to the Bombay Presidency and the Madras Presidency. 
Generally, these documents are not available. 


As per records maintained by Defence Authorities ‘most of the 
bungalows/residential sites in the Cantonments all over the country are 
held on “old Grants.” Some of the private persons known as occupancy 
holders of these ‘sites have now started disputing the Governments 
ownership of the land. In the case of Union of India Vs P.D. Tandon 
pertaining to bungalow No. 29 Chatham Lines, Allahabad Cantonment, 
the Supreme Court shifted the burden of proof on the Union of India. In 
respect of Pune Cantt. occupancy ‘holders of 16 old grant Bungalows have 
challenged the Government title to the land in Supreme Court. The 
Supreme Court has remanded these cases to Bombay High Court and the 
matter is subjudice at present. 


2.13 In a subsequent note the Ministry of Defence while explaining their 
views on transfer on sale/allotment to original or their successor allottees 
such of old grant sites or lands as were not needed by the Ministry of 
Defence and difficulties in solving the problems through a statute, have 
stated tHitt: “old grant sites exist only in Cantonments. On these sites the 


21461 5-6 


24 


land belongs to Ministry of Defence and the buildings belong to the 
grantee’s successor. The accepted policy of the Government in respect of 
such sites is that in the Notified Civil Area (bazaar) the built up area and 
the land which cannot be independently used from such sites may be 
transferred to the occupancy holder on free hold at the estimated market 
value. This poses no problem. But this option has been unattractive 
because those who have lived on the sites for 100-150 years do not want to 
pay market value. They do not come forward for conversion. As regards 
the sites outside the notified civil area (bangalow areas) the policy of the 
Government has been not to transfer the rights in the land to the grantee’s 
successor but to reserve such sites for future defence use, by resumption. 
Hence, the question of transfer of such sites, on sale, does not arise within 
the present policy. 


(2) The occupancy holders are demanding/ agitating that the sites should 
be treated as their private land and not the land of the Ministry of 
Defence. Problems have arisen when the Government wanted to resume 
the sites by paying compensation only for authorised structurés and 
nothing for the land. Occupants got stay orders from the Court or even 
judgements against the view that the land belonged to the Government and 
the occupancy holder’s rights were as under the old grant terms. 
Generally, in most of the cases, the original grant papers are not available. 
A statutory presumption that the site shall be treated as belonging to the 
Government of India in the Ministry of Defence and the occupancy holder 
has a right as contained in the old grant, notified by the Governor General 
in 1936, may not be upheld even if a statutory presumption of ownership 
of land is enacted. On this matter, the then Attorney General (Shri K. 
Parasaran) had advised as below, in September, 1986:— 


‘A legislation can be made on the lines indicated ....... more 
particularly a rule of evidence as to presumption, the title in the 
land in the Cantonment areas vest in the Government and that it 1s 
for the parties to prove the same. It should not be overlooked that 
parties may also seek to prove title by an adverse possession if 
they had completed 60 years of adverse possession before coming 
into force of the Limitation Act of 1963 or if they had not 80 
completed 60 years before that date to allege and prove that they 
180 been in adverse possession for a period of 30 years, being the 
period prescribed under the 1963 Act. Any such legislation which 
may be passed may not cut short fhe litigation which crop up in 
future. The present day pattern of litigation is such any litigation 
can be prolonged. In fact even a legislation which may be made on 
the salient features may itself be challenged as unconstitutional and 
on that issue the litigation may hang on for some years.’ 


(3) When the draft legislation was examined, the Ministry of Law had 
advised that though a law of evidence can be created presiimptionary 
status, if conferred on the present GLRs, may not be upheld by the Courts 


25 


as the Registers were not prepared in the same way as the Settlement 
Records prepared under the State Land Revenue Codes. It was indicated 
that once a similar record is created a presumptionary value could be 
placed. In September 1989, the Law Ministry recorded as follows:— 


‘The administrative Ministry will have to find out a sound course 
of action by which they should be able to maintain their General 
Land Register based on indisputable particulars..One way perhaps 
could be to have a statutory body or a small tribunal entrusted 
with the powers to determine the ownership of all properties 
within Cantonment areas and the General Land Registers should 
be based on the final determination of title by such body or 
tribunal. The final determination of title obviously would be made 
after giving opportunity to all interested parties to come forward 
and produce whatever evidence they have in support of their 
claim. For such adjudication it should also be necessary to take 
into account the historical facts reflecting on the ownership of the 
land such as that a particular territorial area was acquired by 
conquest. If the volume of work is considerable establishment of 
more than one such bodies or tribunal could be considered. Issuing 
title deeds afresh after final determination by such body can also 
be thought of and General Land Registers could be prepared 
accordingly. Thus, it will be a one time measure. I may, however, 
clarify that we are not advising the course of action as suggested in 
this para, this merely an idea for consideration of the administra- 
tive Ministry. If they feel that this can be usefully worked out we 
can discuss it further.’ 


(4) Acknowledging Governments mere ownership right on the land is 
not adequate; the nature of the rights of the holder of the land and 
Government as in old grant has also to be mandated. It is doubtful 
whether such a presumption would survive judicial scrutiny. 


This apart, under the Constitution, Entry 18 of the List II (State List) in 
Schedule VII of the Constitution is the following— 


‘18. Land, that is to say, rights in and over land, land tenures 
including the relation of landlord and tenant, and the 
collection of rents, transfer and alienation of agricultural land, 
land improvement and agricultural loans, colonization.’ 


(5) The State Legislature has exclusive jurisdiction on the above matter 
vide Art. 246(2). The substance of the proposed legislation we have on 
hand is what interest shall be reckoned for various parties (Govt. of India, 
old Grantees, occupants, challengers etc.) in respect of the land in the 
Cantonments and what the land tenures are. Hence, the heart of the 
matter in legislation appears to belong to the State Legislature and not to 
the Union Legislature. Thus, it is felt that the more relevant and striking 
provision in the Constitution regarding legislative jurisdiction being Entry 


26 


18 List II, the Parliament may be devoid of power for the proposed 
legislation. 

(6) Even before the federal structure was introduced, Lord Curzon who 
attempted to create a law or presumption of government ownership of the 
land did not succeed in the effort. It is not quite certain that the 
Parliament can legislate on this matter. The number of properties left as 
‘old grant’ in bungalow areas is now about 2,000, with a total area of 
12,000 acres, distributed in about 50 cantonments. Only a part of these 
properties would be resumed and that too over many years. In the notified 
civil areas (bazaar areas) there are about 45,000 holdings with a total area 
of about 5,000 acres. It is unlikely, for socio-political reasons, that we 
would ever resume the sites in bazaar areas. The reliance to be placed on 
the General Land Register entries is being considered by the Bombay High 
Court (from 5th November, 1990 onwards) in a batch of appeals filed by 
Government in respect of cases where resumptions done in Pune had been_ 
quashed. Once the judgements in these appeals are announced, certain 
clarity will emerge. 


(7) The case in the Bombay High Court has not yet been taken up for 
hearing though it has been appearing high on the list. 


2.14 Explaining the genesis of ‘old grants’ sites the Director General, 
Defence Estates stated during evidence: 


“Those sites were initially given to the Army Officers and later to 
other persons to build bungalows, houses and shops. When we 
wanted we could pay the value for the building and take over the 
property because it is a joint property. The people who are holding 
that want us to recognise the lan is be theirs and want freedom to 
use that land for re-development for building houses and for 
building commercial complexes. As far as the 4 rmy is concerned, 
they have treated these as assets. By paying compensation for the 
aged buildings, when we want to take over the land from them, we 
assert that the land is ours and the building is theirs.” 


2.15 Commenting about the feasibility of resolving this problem through 
an enactment of Parliament the Secretary, Ministry of Defence during 
evidence said: 

“The question, and the prospect through fresh legislation, of vesting 
the prescribed property rights with the Government, that is, in the 
Ministry of Defence, appears to have been very extensively 
examined in the past years and the advice of successive Attorney 
Generals also solicited through the Ministry of Law and so on. In 
sum, it would appear, purely in legal terms, that it is not possible 
through an Ordinance or an Act of Parliament to invest the Ministry 
of Defence with such rights as you have in mind. We have been 
facing a series of court cases in various State High Courts and the 
Supreme Court. A batch of our cases are being heard in the 


27 


Bombay High Court on what kind of sanctity could, possibly, be 
attached to the GLR. On the basis of the studies of the records that 
we hold as of today and the circumstantial/collateral evidence, 
various High Court have been inclined, for given reasons, to give us 
different verdicts on the principal issue of where these properties 
will vest land what rights we have. We are quite willing to consider 
any thing considering the long past history of this as also the 
recommendations of the earlier Estimates Committee. My own 
view, after seeing the past records of this case, is that nothing very 
much is likely to come up through the legal process, specially as the 
advice of one former Attorney General, Mr. Parasaran is very 
extensive and is also not very old. It is of recent origin. He has 
conclusively summed up by saying that in the existing judicial 
environment and seeing the earlier rulings of the Supreme Court on 
allied issues. It is not possible to consider and conceive legislation 
which invests the Government such rights as you have just referred 
to. That leaves us with very little leeway in terms of how we tackle 
these 2000 and odd Old Grant cases in Bunglow areas spread over 
50 Cantonment Boards and covering 12000 acres of land in the 
bazar area around. The land, as such, is located in the prime areas 
of very valuable urban land. And, around these grant sites are the 
costliest establishments of great concern. It is not merely for 
economic and monetary purpose that we try to cling on to the Old 
Grant sites. But the reason ts, if these were to go out of our hands 
unconditionally, they will jeopardise our establishments in the 
overall area in which they are located and will create a series of 
problems for us specially in those States where the State authorities, 
and the local municipal authorities do not have any firm legislation 
or bye-laws to regulate or other laws to enforce it. The value of the 
land is extremely high. A case in point is Pune where we have faced 
a series of problems in the recent past and we are continuing to face 
cases in the Bombay High Court. We are continually trying that 
ever best we can do and we would be most willing to get further 
advice of this Hon. Committee on what should be done in addition 
to what we have done in the past, because, our effort, in the recent 
times of trying to secure legal authority to put an end to the existing 
situation has not met with much success. That leaves us with the 
non-legal, place to place, site to site, informal approach, if that is 
acceptable to the Government. The Government works on the basis 
of checks and balances. If such discretion is given, which is 
unfettered, then there may be a series of agreements which are not 
uniform or equal in terms of natural justice. We have a problem in 
terms of an informal approach to the problem. On the legal side, we 
seem to have come to a very difficult kind of situation. We will now 
see how the Bombay High Court directs us to go. That is our 
position, as of today.” 


28 


2.16 The Committee enquired why the suggestion for setting up of 
Tribunals for establishing title of grant land was not implemented DGDE 
replied: 

“This is a suggestion from the Law Ministry. When we have a 
problem of title they had said that on the basis of the evidence a 
record of title should be created and a new record of rights should 
be created for these areas. Here again, the problem is what is the 
documentation to be placed before the tribunal. That itself is 
lacking. Although creation of a tribunal is within the jurisdiction of 
the Central Government, after the Constitution came into force, 
Entry 18 in the State List says, ‘land trial’ and interest of people in 
the land is a subject matter of the legislation of the State 
Government.” 


2.17 The Quartermaster General added: 


‘“‘Now we have reached a stage that Tribunal is to decide what 
interest various persons have got to the land. It is a matter actually 
for the State Government to see. Therefore, the Central legislation 
there will became possibly questionable.” 


2.18. The representative further stated: 


‘It is a very difficult problem at the moment and it is more difficult 
when you look at the larger cantonments which are urbanised. I 
think, we as Government, are not very fair to the people who have 
been on occupation for the last 100 years. Under the present terms, 
they are not ready to quit. We are paying them at the bogk value of 
the property. It may be to the tune of Rs. 20,000 or so. That is the 
book value.” 


Military Farms 


2.19 The Military Farms cover a total of 37,017 acres of land at various 
stations. This excludes approximately 72,000 acres of land, at Gwalior, 
known as Grass-birs and held by MF till about 2 years back. These lands 
have been transferred to other local Army units. The breeding farms at 
Hissar and Babugarh and the Remount and Training Depots at Hempur 
and Saharanpur of the RVC occupy 6227 acres of land. Some of the land 
holdings of Military Farms at prime locations are as follows:— 


Station Area in acres 
(1) Agra Cantt. 269 
(2) Jhansi Cantt. 1088 
(3) Allahabad Cantt. 843 
(4) Bareilly 754 
(5) Ranchi 382 


(6) Lucknow 1518 


29 


(7) Kanpur Cantt. 861 
(8) Sitapur 4492 
(9) Jabalpur 1100 
(10) Hospet Taluk 

Bellary Distt. 5628 
(11) Belgaum (outside Cantt.) 721 
(12) Delhi 80 
(13) Ambala 338 
(14) Indore 1645 
(15) Jamnagar 554 
(16) Secunderabad 4063 
(17) Bangalore Distt. 1099 
(18) Jalandhar 707 
(19) Ferozpur Cantt. 954 


2.20 Explaining the rationale of setting up Military Farms the Ministry 
stated that these were established sometime in the beginning of the last 
century when the Cantonments in most places were fall away from the 
townships and there was no reliable arrangement, locally, for supply of 
milk. There were also no arrangements for storing milk for given periods. 
Hence, in most of the places where Cantonments were established Military 
Farms were also set up to meet the daily milk requirement of the troops. 


The Ministry further stated that today, the situation has altogether 
changed. With the improvement in the transport system, the development 
of cooperative milk Unions, the growth of the townships itself and the milk 
revolution (Operations Flood), the availability and supply position of milk 
has considerably improved. 


Dwelling upon the relevance of these farms in the changed situation the 
Ministry stated that Military Farms, as they are located, cater to the needs 
of only a small percentage of the troops. The 1988-89 audited data reveal 
that the annual requirement of liquid milk was 821 lakh litres. Of this only 
302 lakhs (i.e.37%) was produced by the Military Farms and the balance 
was purchased by the ASC/MFs. In addition MF produced 3.90 lakh Kgs. 
of butter, 9881 Kgs. of Cream, 6348 Kgs. of ‘Paneer’ and 30,000 tonnes of 
hay for animals. Some of the lands which they hold are very fertile and 
valuable. With the present day situation the continuance of the Military 
Farms requires very serious re-examination. 


2.21 Referring to audit observation, contained in C&AG Report (No. 2 
of 1988) on working of Military Farms, that the cost of production of milk 
in most of the Military Farms was higher than the civil rates. The 
Committee enquired during evidence whether there was any need for 
continuing these Military Farms. The Defence Secretary, in his reply 
stated:— 


‘I don’t, think there is any need to debate this point. We are in the 


30 


process of doing something about them. We are seeing how to 
rationalise the whole situation. We will try to do it on a time-bound 
basis. I think before the end of the 8th Defence Plan, that is, 1995, 
the whole thing will be resolved. But that does mean that the 
desired decisions will not be taken in the next two to three years.” 


2.22 The Committee were informed in a separate written note that a 
study Team constituted by Army HQrs will look into the recammendations 
of an Expert Committee, which had favoured disbandment of Military 
Farms. 


Cantonments and Military Stations 


2.23 The stations at which the Army was quartered came to be known as 
Cantonments. To start with the sites they came to occupy accrued to them 
as a result of conquest or under agreement with the then Rulers of the 
different States. The first such Cantonment was established in 1765 at 
Barrackpore. The last Cantonment was established in 1962 at Ajmer. 
There are 62 Cantonments. The Cantonments are basically meant, for 
stationing the troops. However, civilian population also lives in the 
Cantonment. It is this Urban population which provided the requisite 
supplies/services/domestic servants etc. According to the present policy no 
new Cantonments are being established. Instead, Military Stations are 
planned wherever necessary. Since 1962, Military Stations have been 
established at many places. There are 239 Military Stations. 


2.24 Explaining the concept of a ‘military station’ the Ministry stated 
that a station where the Forces are quartered permanently and is not part 
of a Cantonment or of any Municipality/Corporation is a Military Station. 
For example Bhatinda, Hissar, Pathankot, Suratgarh, Lalgarh, Jattan, 
Guwahati, Narangi, Tezpur, Jorhat, Bengdubi etc. Which are outside the 
Municipal limits, are Military Stations. 


On the other hand pockets of land, where troops are quartered in 
Calcutta, Madras, Bombay, Bangalore, Shimla and which are within the 
Municipal Corporation limits, are neither Cantonments nor Military 
Stations. They are known as ‘Enclaves’. 


2.25 According to the evidence given by the then Defence Secretary 
before the Estimates Committee (1982-83), the genesis of the decision not 
to set up any new Cantonment, was that the maintenance and provision of 
civic facilities to the civilian population was, under the Cantonment Act 
the responsibility of the local authority for that area. In view of that it was 
not considered necessary for the Ministry of Defence to accept that 
responsibility and it was decided that in future they should take responsibi- 
lity only for the military troops, by setting up Military Stations. 


2.26 In regard to review of Policy for setting up only Military Stations 
the Ministry of Defence stated as follows: 


“The Estimates Committee of the Lok Sabha examined the subject 


31 


‘Cantonments’ in 1982-83. They ‘welcomed’ the ‘policy’ of the 
Government to set up only Military Stations, comprising areas for 
lodging the troops and setting up military facilities and installations 
and not Cantonments comprising military as well as civilian 
population after 1962.”’ 


2.27 Asked in this context, to justify the wisdom in setting up and 
continuing with Cantonment Boards, the Secretary, Ministry of Defence, 


stated: 


“I would submit that at different points of time, Cantonment 
Boards were decided to be established. Since the situation on the 
ground being what it was, the then colonial authority could not take 
any other decision. We have not given up Cantonment Board 
because it has relevance for one or the other Defence Service. Also 
because of large investment made over a period of time and the 
structural facilities created, it has not always been easy to take the 
hard decision of giving it up. For example, our presence in Delhi. 
The question arises from time to time, between us and the Services, 
as to how much we can vacate and where we can go and what 
quantum of additional funds would be required to recreate this 
essential infrastructure. The answer to this has been very costly.” 


2.28 Explaining as to whether the Ministry had made the best use of 
surplus pockets in Cantonment Military Stations and Enclave lands, the 
Secretary submitted that: 


“Cantonments and Military Stations are two denominations. The 
Military Station came much after the historical concept of 
Cantonment and the socio-economic situation had undergone 
enormous changes even before the attainment of Independence and 
more so after 1947, and the Services in their wisdom, specially the 
Army, wich has the largest presence on the ground, felt that the 
erstwhile concept is not altogether viable. The Government went 
over this proposition and, over a period of time, it was accepted. 
The answer to the question whether the Army needs to be on the 
ground in sizeable strength, in indentified areas lies not in 
replicating the concept of Cantonments and acquiring the required 
area of land and giving it entirely to the control and responsibility of 
the Board. There is absolutely no civilian presence in the Military 
Stations. In Cantonment from time to time, we have a sizeable 
civilian population.” 


2.29 The Committee pointed out that as certain pockets of Defence land 


called Enclaves did not have benefit of independent maintenance and were 
dependent on civil authorities for water and scavanging etc. These could 


2146LS-7 


32 


also called Military Stations. In this context the Defence Secretary, at one 
stage of the evidence, clarified as under:— 


“So far as Enclave lands are concerned, that conceptually it is not a 
third category as compared to Cantonment and Military Station.” 


2.30 In this connection, the Quartermaster General, Army Headquarters 
in his evidence before the Committee stated: 


“The Cantonment consists of two parts. Some areas are inhabited 
by civilian population and other areas are basically kept for the 
military purpose. There are certain areas in this set up which are 
used both by the civilian as well as the military like roads, schools, 
hospitals and things like that. The areas which are basically under 
the occupation of the mihtary are really independent and looked 
after by the military through the military funds. No grant comes 
from the Cantonment Board. Whereas other areas which are under 
the occupation of the civians and commonly used by both military 
and civilians are normally looked after by the funds either genecated 
or grants given to the Cantonment Board. 


Our experience of the Cantonments in the early 50s has been sad 
in the sense that there has been a lot of encroachment with the kind 
of people who spoiled the get up and environment. Secondly, if you 
look at Cantonments they have now been overtaken by the 
metropolitan areas or township whereas the Military Stations are 
not seen on the maps—they are a few kilometres away from the 
town. As the possession of the land close to metropofitan towns was 
very difficult, therefore the Military Stations went out of the ambit 
of the normal municipal limits and functioning. 


We also looked at the fact that we don’t really need any 
additional help from the civilian population because of the socio- 
economic condition of an officer at this time. Previously military 
officers used to have ten to fifteen civilian servants in their house, 
they were having a horse or two and the maintenance staff etc. But 
now ail that has gone. Most of the units in the Military Stations are 
also on war establishments and they don’t need any other assistance. 
Units with civilians are mainly regimental centres, school, etc. now. 


So you can see that Cantonments developed only certain pockets of the 
civilians as they were. But the Military Stations were developed purely 
with military presence and whatever civil population was there—say a few 
small houses or a small little village—was rehabilitated somewhere else and 
the tithe of all land held as a military land or Military Station. The 
development of the station has become settlement of the military set up 
only. Not only that, in the Cantonments, we had a certain established 
norms which helped in the running of the unit in various matters. But we 
have got away from that also. We are self-sufficient in terms of canteen 
services and other small ventures that we have. 


33 


On the schooling side,—Central School, Army School and Unit Nursery 
School—have come up more and more...We are becoming self-sufficient in 
running a particular station.” 


2.31 Asked whether Military Stations can be converted into 
Cantonments without civilian population so that certain powers to raise 
funds within the Military Stations are exercised to reduce dependence on 
Ministry of Defence grants the QMG replied as under: 


“I do admit that if we were to have municipal functioning there for 
carrying out such duties, we could generate some money, that is 
true.” 


2.32 During on-the-spot study of Study Group of the Committee to 
Secunderabad Cantonment in October, 1990, the Vice President and 
elected Members of the Secunderabad Cantonment Board and other public 
representatives in Memoranda submitted as well as during informal 
discussion highlighted the following inadequacies of the Cantonment and 
also raised some issues of general nature: | 


(1) The Secunderabad Cantonment is the largest and the poorest 
Cantonment all over the country, consisting of more than 3 lakhs 
population. About 80% people are weaker sections. At present 
within a decade about 300 new colonies have come up. The 
Government of India, Ministry of Defence may sanction funds of 
Rupees 25 crores for all round development of civic amenities such 
as drinking water supply, drainage system, repairing and_ asphalting 
roads, street lights, maintenance of public gardens, children: parks, 
community centres and public libraries and educational, medical and 
recreational facilities and implementation of master plan. 


(2) The Cantonments Act, 1924 may be amended to free the 64 
Cantonments in the country and just make it like any other 
Municipal Act. 


(3) In Secunderabad Cantonment, there is no industry, no colleges, no 
general hospital, no high schools, no ITI for the educational 
purposes. Children go to adjoining Hyderabad City near about 15 
Km. away from the Cantonment area. 


(4) Surrounding civil areas lying vacant lands are not useful for the 
Defence purpose. It may be allotted to the weaker sections of 
society under Housing Schemes. 


(5) In civil areas people residing since more than 200 years by 
constructing their houses should be granted free-hold rights to 
them. At present they are not allowed to construct houses as they. 
are considered as ‘Old Grants’. 


(6) In Secunderabad Cantonment about 150 allotted on lease bunglows 
land area under the management of D.E.O. as B3, B4 lands, 


34 


consisting approximately 500 acres of land, should be taken over by 
the Ministry of Defence and auctioned to the Housing societies. 


(7) At present within a decade 300 colonies apart from the old localities 
have sprung up but staff i.e. safaiwalas, etc., have been reduced 
from 490 to 400 instead of increasing the safaiwalas. So minimum 
five hundred (500) mazdoors are required for the Cantonment. So 
remove the ban on recruitment and filling up sanctioned posts in all 
categories for Secunderabad Cantonment which was imposed two 
years back. 


2.33 The Ministry of Defence (Director-General, Defence Estates) with 
whom the matter was taken up, furnished a note giving their factual 
comment inter alia demand- wise as follows:— 


1. Sanction of Rs. 25 crores for implementation of Master Plan for 
development of Secunderabad Cantt. 


The Secunderabad Cantt. Board had commissioned the services of the 
Kirloskar Consultants to draw up a Master Plan to improve the drainage, 
sewerage, roads and parks etc. of the Cantonment. The Master Plan 
prepared in Aug. 1987 envisages an investment of Rs 10 crores for works. 
At todays cost the expenditure could be over double the amount. The cost 
of augmenting water supply through the Hyderabad Metropoliton Water 
Supply Authority is extra and was not covered by the Kirloskar Study. This 
outline estimate had been considered by Cantt. Board and the GOC-in-C, 
Southern Command. Implementation of such a scheme requires 
considerable financial support from the Government of India which is not 
in sight. The GOC-in-C has ascertained availability of grants to approve 
the scheme. But, for want of fund allocation in the Defence Plan this is 
not possible. 


(2) Amendment of Cantonments Act, 1924 


The observation of the Members are, apparently, on a 
misunderstanding. The basic feature of the Cantonments Act is the same 
as of the Municipal Act. There are no amendments of material nature 
required to be made to the Cantonments Act. The Act was last amended 
in 1983. 


(3) Provision of Education and Medical facilities 


The facilities like colleges, hospitals, high schools, ITI etc. established or 
supported by the State Government are available for residents of the twin 
city (Secunderabad and Hyderabad) which includes the Secunderabad 
Cantt. The Cantt. Board is not running a general hospital but it is 

‘maintaining three dispensaries in 3 localities. Financial position of the 
Cantt. Board does not enable the Cantt. Board to establish and maintain 
general hospital, schools etc. 


35 


(4) Allotment of vacant lands not useful for Defence purposes in 
Secunderabad Cantt. to Weaker Sections 


In Secunderabad Cantt. the Army is of the view that they are short of 
lands for their own requirements. In that perspective the vacant defence 
lands there are actually for future defence use. There is no restriction on 
use of private lands in the Cantt. in accordance with the building lay-out/ 


bye-laws/FSI. 


(5) Grant of free-hold Rights 


The existing policy permits grant of free-hold rights to old grants in civil 
areas. But the facilities of conversion to free-hold in the civil areas has not 
been utilised by the present occupancy holders. What, presumably, they 
want is that the Government treat all the old grant sites as free-hold of the 
occupancy holder. That is, gift away the site to them. This is not possible. 


(6) The Bungalow sites under the management of the DEO are liable to 
be taken over as and when defence requirement arises. Since the 
resumption gets stalled due to various judicial processes, the progress of 
resumption has been slow. It is not intended to resume sites for disposing 
it off in auction. By disposing off the land associated with the bungalows 
the Cantt. Board does not become self-sufficient anyway. Land belongs to 
the Ministry of Defence and when disposed off the sale value accrues to 
Central Government and not ta the Cantt. Board. 


(7) Removal of Ban on Recruitment 


With 213 housing colonies coming up during the last 15 years, there has 
been a requirement for increasing the strength of the conservancy staff. 
The Cantt. Board had, in December, 1986 sought the sanction of the 
GOC-in-C, Southern Command for creation of additional staff as below: 


Sanitary Inspector : 02 
Sanitary Overseer : 07 
Safaiwalas : 341 


There were severe constraints of resources and the Board was not in a 
position to meet the additional expenditure involved in the creation of the 
posts. However, the GOC-in-C sanctioned, in Sept. 1987, 45 additional 
posts of safaiwalas, thus total authorisation of the conservancy staff of the 
Cantt. Board went up from 492 in 1947 to 537 in Sept. 1987. Before the 
vacant posts could be filled the DGDE imposed a ban on making 
recruitments to fill vacant posts in State-aided Cantt. Boards because there 
was no money to ensure that the establishment could be paid their salaries. 


Over the years some retirements took place. Now, even on the 
authorised strength of 537 posts, there are 84 vacant posts. The total grant- 


36 


in-aid provided by the Ministry of Defence for 62 Cantts in the last few 
years has been as below: 


Year Amount Year Amount 
(in crores of Rs) (in crores of Rs) 

1980-81 4.36 1986-87 7.50 

1981-82 5.00 1987-88 7.84 

1982-83 6.00 1988-89 9.00 

1983-84 6.60 1989-90 9.10 

1984-85 10.88 1990-91 9.00 

1985-86 8.00 


From 1.1.86 with State Governments revising the pay scales of their 
employees to the level of the revised pay scales of the Central Government 
Employees, the Cantt. Boards also had to revise their pay scales to the 
same level, retrospectively, during the last one to two years. With the 
granting of minimum pension, at the Central Govt. rates and relief’on 
pension, the liabilities of the Cantt. Boards have gone up. Added to this is 
the additional liability on the cost of POL, water supply, electricity etc. 
Hence, the Cantt. Boards are not in a position to discharge their 
responsibilities without significant increase in grant-in-aid. 


2.34 The Ministry of Defence further stated that “the DGDE had 
projected a minimuin requirement of Rs. 125 crores during the plan period 
1990-95 for special grant-in-aid for the 62 Cantonments to take up various 
development projects of which Rs. 100 crores was to be from the ‘service 
charges’ component and Rs. 25 crores from ‘grants’ component. An 
amount of Rs. 175.07 crores had also reflected in the proposal given by the 
DGDE towards ordinary grant-in-aid to balance the budgets of the 
Cantonment Board in their activities. Unless money on the basis of these 
projections are included in the Defence Plan, the Cantonment Board 
cannot be sanctioned any amount for implementing the Master Plan or for 
meeting the demands in Secunderabad. It would be observed from the data 
furnished above that the amount of grant-in-aid sanctioned during the last 
one decade has been grossly inadequate. There is no outlook for better 
prospect. Hence, the Master Plan prepared by the Kiloskar Consultants at 
an estimated cost of Rs. 25 crores is difficult to be implemented.” 


2.35 In another note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of 
Defence have intimated: 


“No local body discharging its functions properly can be self- 
sufficient, as their allocated resource-streams are meagre and the 
areas of responsibility large. Even large Corporations like those of 
Calcutta, Bombay. Madras, Delhi are highly State-aided. Even the 
New York Municipal Corporation was bankrupt in the 1970s, 
without Federal and State aid. It is thus apparent that whoever 


37 


administers the Cantonment Board areas, financial assistance shall 
require to be rendered from the Union funds. On this broad basis, 
the DGDE has been arguing for financial assistance on the same 
basis as the MCD and the NDMC are being helped by the Central 
Government (Home Ministry). 


When the service charges of the Municipal Corporations like 
those of Delhi, New Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta etc. can be planned, 
budgeted and paid, and that too at 3/4 rate of property tax why 
should the dues of the Cantonment Boards even at 1/3rd rate be 
not planned, budgeted and paid? No tax is levied in Chandigarh. 
Ministry of Home Affairs funds the maintenance and development 
of the city. Five years back the budget for that was Rs. 160 crores 
of whieh only some part was for law and order responsibility. 
Hundreds of crores of rupees have been given to MCD and 
NDMC during the past plan periods for civic amenities. Though 
Bombay Municipal Corporation is the responsibility of the 
Maharashtra Govt., an annual grant of Rs. 100 crores has been 
sought from the Centre. Hence, there is no reasons why Ministry 
of Defence should not discharge the responsibility placed on it.” 


2.36 In regard to higher grants for maintenance of Cantonments, the 
Secretary, the Ministry of Defence, during evidence stated as follows: 


“I am not sure whether the Government would be in a position to 
give higher grants. It 1s a question of resources. And in the case of 
payment of service charge, to be made mandatory, we will have to 
see, as to how to take this up. This will also require further 
consultation with the Ministry of Finance. Now, about other 
observations that the Cantonment Boards be assisted on the same 
pattern as the Municipal areas, wherever located, in the States or 
Union Territories, I feel that this should be done because what 
actually we have is not the question of administration of the 
Cantonment Boards. We are now differentiating the civic 
population living in the Cantonment and that in the adjoining 
Municipal areas, whether it is a family welfare grant or housing 
plan or water supply or sewerage grant from the Union Ministry of 
Urban Development or from wherever else, we ourselves feel that 
it is not a very fair treatment, especially, when we have no 
resources in the Ministry of Defence to give larger grants to the 
Cantonments. About the commercial exploitation of identified 
areas, we have discussed it earlier also and this should be 
attempted. 


Civic areas of other Cantonment Boards and the _ local 
Municipalities and other observation that the development and 
maintenance of civic facilities like running of local road system, 
street illumination, water supply. sewerage etc., these should be 


38 


planned and maintaned in collaboration with the civic authorities, 
we shall definitely pursue this with the concerned authorities. We 
have to persuade the State Governments and bring them around. 
What I can submit today is that, when the Committee’s 
recommendations are made available, we will definitely follow 
these up with seriousness and within a time frame.” 


2.37 The Committee were informed that the Cantonment Boards are 
entitled for a service charge calculated at only 33'/;% of the property tax 
on the Ministry of Defence Properties. But, the Central Government pays 
to other municipal bodies similar charges at 33'/,% to 75% of such rates. 
On this also the Ministry of Defence has not, reportedly, been meeting the 
full claims of the Cantonment Boards, which now, stand at about Rs. 20 
crores per annum. The allocations of fund to meet the dues on this have 
been only as below: 


Yeur Amount Year Amount 
(in crores of Rs.) (in crores of Rs.) 
1985-86 12.95 1988-89 12.37 
1986-87 8.00 1989-90 12.26 
1987-88 9.50 1990-91 12.44 (Estimate) 


— 


Thus, the normal dues, even at the lowest rate were not paid to the 
Cantonment Boards. 


Conclusions ~ 


2.38 The lands held in custody by the Defence Estate Organisation include 
60828 acres which are not under active use and are comprised of lands 
under forests in the hill Cantonments, all the sites on grants and lease in the 
bungalow areas of all the Cantonments, lung-spaces left as unbuilt or 
unbuildable in the Cantonments and many of the old camping grounds and 
abandoned air-flelds which Army/Air Force have handed over as surplus. 
The lands which are largely comprised of oid camping grounds and 
abandoned air-fields constitute around 1% (22,500 acres) of the total Defence 
lands. These have been lying unused since the early fifties. As some of these 
lands do not serve any alternative defence purpose, these have been 
declared surplus. The Defence Secretary during evidence before the 
Committee admitted that there was need to ensure that unused lands are 
not held without justification. 


The Committee enquired into the prospects of these surplus lands being 
exchanged for such lands as could be of use to the Defence Services or their 
out-right disposal, particularly where the lands are situated at prime urban 
locations. The Committee are informed that Government have taken a 
policy decision that no Defence land shall be declared surplus and, if at all, 
any land is to be given up it must be done on an exchange basis. 
Nevertheless the policy permits the Ministry to part with this land in favour 


39 


of State Governments, Central Government Departments and Public Sector 
Undertakings on merits of each case. 


They are further informed that lists of sites declared as surplus land 
circulated to State Governments concerned in 1986 had not elicited any 
satisfactory response. In part only one site was under transfer to West 
Bengal Government as a result of offers made to State Governments. The 
Committee are further informed that it has been decided that all the three 
Defence Services would review their plans and examine whether any of the 
abandoned air fields would be required to be retained for Defence purposes 
and that the issue of disposing of these air-fields would be settled only after 
a clear picture emerges. 


Recommendations 


2.39 While the Committee would like the Ministry to expedite the final 
assessment of the three services in regard to lands which are surplus such as 
abandoned air fields and camping grounds they would also like this exercise 
to be carried out with some degree of finality. All efforts may be made to 
transfer such lands to the State Governments concerned and other 
Departments/Public Sector Undertakings of the Central Government. At the 
same time the Committee desire that the option of disposing of such lands 
on a commercial basis needs to be considered seriously and promptly. They 
would also suggest that some of these lands may be offered to civilian 
population living in the adjoining areas and having already encroached 
upon or having access to these lands through the respective State 
Governments. In case State Gayernments do not come forward to take over 
these lands under. a time bound programme and on terms reasonably 
advantageous to the Ministry of Defence, the Committee are of the view that 
the Ministry of Defence should feel free to either use them for self-financing 
housing projects for the benefit of retiring Defence personnel through the 
Army Welfare Housing Organisations or use it for other commercial 
purposes with the assistance of agencies like L.1.C. and Housing Urban 
Development Corporation. The Committee also feel that such lands can also 
be advantageously utilised for rehabilitation of persons displaced from lands 
which have been acquired by the Ministry in some other locations in 
consultation with State Governments. 


Conclusions 


2.40 The Committee note that defence lands not under active use include 
72,000 acres of grass-birs forest area in Gwalior which is the natural habitat 
of great Indian bustard. They were informed that this forest area is being 
maintained by the Ministry of Defence from its own resources. During 
evidence Defence Secretary accepted the suggestion to hand over this land to 
the Ministry of Environment. 


2146LS-8 


40 


Recommendation 


The Committee recommend that apart from grass-birs at Gwalior other 
classified forests being maintained by the Ministry of Defence, as a part of 
various hill Cantonments, should also be considered for transfer to the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests. However, they desire the Ministry of 
Defence to keep on maintaining those forest areas where they have been 
using the land even partially. 


Conclusions 


2.41 The Committee note that position regarding ownerships of old grant 
sites has been subject of doubt and the matter is before the Courts of Law. 
They find that in the early days of British rule, the administration of 
Cantonment lands was governed by a series of military regulations issued 
separately by the military authorities of the three presidencies. Under these 
regulations, permission to occupy defence land for purposes of residential 
accommodation was processed by the Officer Commanding Station. As the 
final permissions were granted by the OMGs Branch the records regarding: 
those were maintained by OMG staff. However since the Indian 
Registration Act 1908, the Indian Stamp Act, and Transfer of property Act 
etc. had not come into force at that time, the documents supporting these 
grants, could not be registered like a normal tiitle deed. Moreover at the 
present stage such documents called as ‘Old Grant Papers’ are not available 
in all cases. 


According to the Ministry of Defence, though a legislation to mandate 
presumption of the Government’s ownership of the land was not enacted, 
the Privy Council, 1911, had ruled in K.A. Ghaswala Vs Secretary of the 
State that Government would be presumed to be proprietor of the soil in 
Cantonments until the contrary was proved. This view was subsequently 
also adopted by the Courts in India. After Independence the said 
presumption theory has, however not been upheld by the Courts of Law. In 
a case of Allahabad Cantonment (Union of India Vs P.D. Tandon) the 
Supreme Court, in 1984, shifted the burden of proof of ownership to the 
Union of India. 


The Ministry of Defence in this regard have decided to adopt a stand in 
the light of judgements of the Bombay High Court on certain resumption 
cases relating to old Grant sites in Pune and the appeals in some of these 
cases now pending before the Supreme Coart. 


Recommendation 


2.42 The Committee, however would recommend to the Ministry of 
Defence that Old Grant sites and lands which are not needed by the 
Ministry of Defence and also do not pose any danger to their 
establishments, may be considered for sate to the original allottees or their 
successors, subject to the verdict of the Supreme Court on appeals on Pune 
resumption cases. The Committee expect that the Ministry would undertake 


41 


such an exercise concurrent with progress ox cases pending in the Courts of 
Law. 


2.43 The Committee note that Military Farms are a legacy of past when 
Army units were stationed far away from urban population and means of 
communication were poor. At that stage fresh vegetables and milk etc. were 
not easily available at remote places where troops were located. With this 
situation having undergone a sea change, they are of the view that there is 
no need for continuing the Military Farms. In this regard the Committee 
also note that the Ministry of Defence have constituted a Study Team whose 
terms of reference inter alia includes making specific recommendations 
regarding disposal or alternative use of land which may become available as 
a result of closure of Military Farms. They find that the Study Team has 
yet to submit its report. 


Recommendation 


The Committee trust that as they have been assured by the Defence 
Secretary, the Government will take an early decision णा the 
recommendations of the Study Team in deciding about the alternative uses 
of land which may become available once Military Farms are closed. 


Conclusions 


2.44 The Committee note that since 1962 no new Cantonments has been 
set up. Instead the Government have established 239 Military Stations to 
quarter Forces on a permanent basis. However, these Stations are neither 
part of a Cantonment nor a municipality and are altogether a separate 
denomination by themselves. The Committee are apprised that the genesis 
of the decision not to set up new Cantonments lies in the view that it was 
not necessary for the Ministry of Defence to accept the responsibility of 
maintaining and provisioning of civic facilities for the civilian population 
which are an inseparable part of the Cantonments. Moreover Defence 
Services have progressively reduced their dependence on civilian support in 
providing various types of services to the troops and their families living 
within the Military Stations which are stated to be functioning in a self- 
sufficient manner. The mainteriance of these Stations is independently 
looked after by the Defence Services and funds for the purpose are being 
provided by Ministry of Defence in the normal budget of the Defence 
Services. 


However, the 62 Cantonments already set up upto 1962 continue to exist 
as before. The Committee are informed that a total switch over to Military 
Stations has not been considered in view of heavy investment in the 
infrastructure already created in the Cantonment areas and also because the 
Cantonments continued to be relevant to the requirements of one or the 
other Defence Service. 


2.45 The Committee note that civic amenities within the Cantonments are 
being provided by their respective Cantonment Boards by utilising their 


42 


own internally generated resources as well as grants-in-aid received from 
the Ministry of Defence. In this context the committee are informed that 
Cantonment Boards are entitled for a service charge calculated at 33 4% 
of the property tax on the properties owned by Ministry of Defence within 
the Cantonment. However, they also learn Government of India are paying 
service charges in regard to its properties falling under various municipal 
bodies, at the rate of 75% of the prevailing rates of property tax. The 
Committee further note that whereas Cantonment Boards, even on the basis 
of existing rates of service charges, ought to have been provided funds to 
the tune of Rs. 20 crores per annum, the actual amount provided to 
Cantonment Boards during the last 6 years has been ranging only between 
Rs. 8 and 13 crores. The Committee are also informed that the budgetary 
position of Cantonment Boards is also very weak so much so that 60-70 
percent of its resources is exhausted in paying the salaries of the staff, and 
that out of 62 only 12 Cantonments are financially viable. 


2.46 The Committee note that the Estimates Committee (1982-83) also 
went into the question of financial resources of the Cantonments in greater | 
details and made a number of recommendations for improvement in their 
financial position. One of the recommendations was to bridge the budgetary 
gaps, if any, of the Cantonments by means of grant-in-aid. The Committee 
find that since then there has been no material difference in the situation 
and the position has not improved in regard to basic civic facilities, viz 
availability of education medical and housing etc. The position has only 
deteriorated because of lack of planning and financial support. 


2.47 The Committee find that the annual grant of Rs. 25 crores provided 
by the Ministry of Defence to the Cantonment Boards for effecting 
improvements in civic amenities in all the 62 cantonments is far too 
inadequate. This is amply evident from the fact that an estimated amount of 
Rs. 25 crores is required for effecting necessary improvement in the 
Secunderabad Cantonment alone. The Committee also note that DGDE have 
projected a minimum requirement of special grant-in-aid amounting to 
Rs. 125 crores during the plan period 1990-95, so as to take up various 
development projects in various cantonmerss and an additional requirement 
of Rs. 175 crores towards ordinary grant-in-aid for balancing the normal 
budget of the Cantonment Boards. The Ministry in their evidence before the 
committee have expressed their helplessness in meeting these requirements. 
The Ministry of Defence have, however conceded that when compared to 
Union Territory of Chandigarh or bodies like NDMC Cantonment Boards 
are not getting a fair treatment and that Municipal Bodies of Delhi and 
Bombay are able to meet their budgetary deficit only through substantial 
grants from Government of India. 


The Committee are surprised to note that even within the Cantonments, 
standards of maintenance vary in respect of areas which are being 
exclusively used by military, and the common areas which are being used by 
both military personnel and the civilians. While the former are maintained 


43 


better and independently by Defence Services through funds separately 
provided to them, the latter are left with whatever little maintenance can be 
afforded by the Cantonment Boards. During the study tour of 
Secunderabad Cantonment, the committee were fully apprised by the 
representatives of the civilian population of the poor civic amenities 
available to the civil population in the Cantonment. These include poor 
conservancy service, lack of health care and educational facilities etc. 
Moreover the Committee also note various other difficulties resulting from 
fast urban growth within and around Secunderabad Cantonment. While the 
Committee appreciate the necessity of providing good civic amenities 
wherever the troops and their families are quartered, they are nontheless 
dismayed to find that civilian components of the Cantonments have been 
given. The Committee wish to underline the importance of providing proper 
civic amenities within the cantonments on a reasonably equitable basis. 
which, in their opinion, is essential for maintaining the overall environment 
and peaceful conditions within the Cantonments. They are convinced that 
continued neglect of the civilian population will in the long run harm the 
interest of the Defence Services. 


Recommendations 


2.48 The Committee, therefore are making the following 
recommendations. 


(1) That Cantonments be treated on the same basis as other union 
Territories/Local Bodies are treated in regard to maintenance grants. 


(2) That the payment of service charge which is 334% of the property tax 
leviable in respect of its properties owned by Ministry of Defence within the 
Cantonments should be brought at par with rates at which municipal bodies 
are entitled to receive service charges in respect of Government of India 
properties. Further, the payment of entitled gross amount service charges of 
cantonment Boards should be made mandatory. 


(3) That the Ministry of Defence must enhance the grant-in-aid to the 
Cantonments. 


(4) That Cantonment Boards should be encouraged to identify area which 
are financially unviable and commercially utilise such areas in the 
Cantonments as are not likely to serve any Defence purpose. 


(5) That the existing homogenous civic areas from old Cantonments like 
Shillong, Pune, Barrackpore-be identified for ultimately handing them over 
to the adjoining civic municipalities, 


(6) That in the development of civic functions like sewage, water and 
power etc. in the Cantonment areas there should be great coordinated and 
joint planning with the existing civilian authorities of the respective states. 


44 


(7) That in order to ease the housing shortage in the Cantonments, the 
FSI restrictions, building bye-laws and the land use policy be so 
reformulated as to ensure: 


(a) optimum utilisation of the scarce resource of land; 

(b) expeditious urban renewal of the station; 

(c) decongestion of crowded locality; and 

(d) Planned and regulated development of vacant/sparcely populated 
localities. 


(8) The Ministry of Defence should evolve a long-term plan for 
identification and consolidation of military areas within the cantonments 
and their ultimate conversion into Military Stations. 


The Committee would like to be apprised of the implementation of the 
steps taken in this regard. 


CHAPTER III 
FINANCIAL RESOURCES 
Requirement of Funds 
3.1 Presently there are 377 acquisition cases at various stages of legal 
process. These cover an area of 1,72,000 acres, distributed between the 


three Services as below:- 


Service No. of Cases Area (acres) Estimated Cost 


(Rs./crores) 


Army 313 1,46,000 110 
Air Force 47 12,540 18 
Navy 17 14,260 37 


Total: 377 1,72,800 165 


3.2 There are a large number of proposals for the acquisition of lands 
under consideration at various levels of the three Services. The acceptance 
of necessity and the administrative sanctions for these proposals have yet 
to be agreed to by the Govt. 


3.3. To make good the current shortfall of land requirements the 
Committee desired to know how much additional resources would be 
needed. In this connection, the Ministry of Defence stated as follows: 


‘For acquisition of 1,72,000 acres of land in 377 cases under 
execution, the estimated cost of compensation is Rs.165 crores 
(Reference para 3.13 preceding). However, because of the time- 
lag between the data relied upon the prepare the estimates and 
the time by which the compensation may be actually disbursed, 
there could be considerable increase in the aforesaid estimated 
cost. 


The exact location and the cost of lands and assets thereon, at 
the sites proposed for the major ranges for Army, have not yet 
been worked out. Estimated cost of acquisition of 94,849 acres 
of additional lands for the ranges at Deolali, Babina and 
Ahmednagar (K.K. Ranges) was Rs. 126 crores in 1989, say Rs. 
140 crores in 1990. Allowing for 10% escalation, the cost of 
acquiring 9.24 lakh acres of land for the Army ranges alone will 
be about Rs. 1364 crores, at 1990 rates. The cost may rise 


45 


46 


further, as the acquisition is likely to be spread over a long 
period.” 


3.4 The Committee asked if no additional resources were made 
available, by which year the existing authorised scales of housing and other 
categories would be complete. To this, the Ministry of Defence, stated as 


follows: 


“The fund requirement for creating housing and other related 
facilities for the presently authorised force level has not been 
estimated by any of the Services. The current holdings of 
accommodation of the Army are approximately 60% of its 
authorisation. The additional requirement of accommodation, to 
cater for full authorisation of the Army, at current prices, will 
cost approximately Rs. 8,000 crores. This includes Rs. 2,500 
crores for new military stations and the modernisation schemes. 
The cost of acquisition of land to bridge the deficiency will be 
additional to this and is likely to vary, depending on the time- 
frame in which the work 1s actually completed. 


We are operating under a system of annual budget 
allocations. It is not practicable to get a firm commitment on 
the availability of resources for the defence sector for a period 
of. 5-10 years. The annual increase in budget allocation may 
range around 7-10%. Necessarily, we have to adopt a resource- 
based approach to the acquisition of additional land and to its 
subsequent utilisation. *... 


We are also actively considering proposals for certain changes 
in the terms of engagement of other Ranks in the Army. In case 
Colour Service is reduced, the requirement of married 
accommodation might get scaled down. Thus, over-all presently 
it is not possible to project a firm picture of fund requirement 
for making up the currently assessed shortfall of land.” 


3.5 In regard to budgetary provision for land acquisition, DGDE stated: 


“When the Defence Plan was thought of, Rs. 17 crores was the 
amount provided for land acquisition. 


3.6 The Quartermaster General, Army Headquarters, supemented: 


“We have got the norms. We ourselves are working as to how 
much will go to land acquisition; how much will go to 
accommodation and how much will go for other things, etc.” 


DGDE further stated: 


“One land acquisition case came up after a long time. There ts an 
award for Rs. 20 crores. The Madhya Pradesh Government goes 
on reminding. I have budget of Rs. 17 crores, in which various 
demands have been included.” 


47 


3.7 When the Committee observed that there had to be a better basis 
for provisioning it, the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Defence, stated: 


“In the Committtee on Defence Expenditure, certain suggestions 
have been made in this regard. One such Suggestion is that it 
should be possible for the Defence Ministry to consider and to 


identify equipments needed and dispose them of.” 


The Quartermaster General admitted: 


“We also agree with you that the present allocation of the plan is 
not adequate. But in the total availability of money, we have to 
see the priority areas.” 


Internal Revenue Generation 


3.9 In response to a query as to whether the Ministry of Defence could 
not generate its own resources to bridge the resource gap, the Ministry 


stated: 


“As far as generation of resources by the MOD is concerned, 
several. approaches have been suggested for introducing market- 
principles into defence land use. It is conceivable that some 
redundant/rarely used defence land could be sold at market prices 
or leased out in such a way that significant funds are generated. 
However, such a concept is yet to be fully developed and accepted 
by the Government.” 


3.10 The Committee enquired whether the Ministry of Defence would 
be able to utilise its land, as a capital, if the concept of self-financing was 
introduced, to generate sufficient internal resources to meet the 
requirements of budget allocations on accommodation. Ministry explained 
the position inter alia as follows: 


“Some method of ‘self-financing’ can be introduced to meet some 
of the requirements of the Services, utilising land as a capital. 
When the Cantonments were developed in the 19th century and 
the early 20th century, lands which were cheap and plentiful were 
given on grants, or leases, first to the Army Officers (who, 
incidentally, were only British officers) and later to others. 
Through utilisation of private capital bungalows/houses/shops 
were constructed in the Cantonments. These became available for 
use by those who were rendering services to the Forces and also 
for the Forces themselves. The Govt. had only to pay a rent for 
the hired buildings and not to make the capital investment. 
Borrowing from the principles adopted in the 19th century and the 
early 20th century, it may be decided that, at certain locations, 
some extent of land can be set apart in the Cantt./Military Station 
and can be sold to Group Housing Societies for making buildings 
according to the specifications required for Service use. Support 
facilities like water, electricity etc. will have to be extended from 


2146LS-9 


48 


the Station resources on payment. There may be many investors 
willing to make investments because of the current non-availability 
of developed lands in urban areas and the problems of constructing 
accommodation. 


Such a scheme of creating housing facilities on ‘self-financing’ 
basis cannot perhaps be adopted at very prime locations where 
there will be competitive hiring”. 


3.11 Another difficulty explained in this context by the Ministry is that 
all revenues of the Govt. have to go to one single Consolidated Fund. All 
expenses from the Consolidated Fund have to be separately authorised by 
Parliament. Ministry of Defence cannot generate its own resources to 
discharge its liabilities even to the extent of financing the land acquisitions. 
The constitution does not envisage the role of a real estate trader for the 
Ministry of Defence/Services. 


3.12 Referring to the Constitutional provisions mandating the money 
accruing out of the sale of assets will go to the Consolidated Fund of Ifdia, 
the Committee enquired whether the Ministry of Defence could not devise 
a scheme after inter-Ministerial meeting by which the amount which goes 
to the Consolidated Fund of India for the sale of the land which is not 
required by the Ministry of Defence could not back to Ministry of Defence 
meet the requirement of housing and other self-financing gchemes. In 
reply, the Secretary, Ministry of Defence, stated: 


“Principally, there is no argument against it. If, for whatever 
reasons, certain funds which accrue on account of whatever sets, 
they necessarily go in to the General Revenues. These could be, 
by a policy decision, reverted to the Ministry. If the Ministry of 
Finance see to that kind of logic, that would be the easiest route of 
re-deploying the resources, we will have to discuss this issue with 
the Ministry of Finance. The other is to tie up with some Public 
Sector Organisations which it could take over our pockets of 
surplus assets and create for us the desired infrastructure whether 
it be housing or any other structure, and adjustment in terms of 
costs could be done. 


In Principle the Ministry of Finance has not shown a negative 
posture. We dispose of some of our equipments which are 
obsolete. They have in principle agreed to our setting up an 
Empowered Committee for the disposal of all waste/unwanted 
stores. I learn, informally, that this has since been approved by the. 
Cabinet and, we will get the formal letter also. All I can say is that 
we will definitely take up in a systematic manner proposals with 
the concerned authority to seek approval of the course which you 
have commented upon and try our best to see it through.” 


3.13 In the context of above discussion the Committee also examined 
the question of relocating Cantonments so as to sell prime land of such 


49 


Cantonments as are existing in the midst of large urban agglomeration. 
The Committee called for the view of the Ministry on the following specific 
points:— 

(a) Ought there to be a total review of this capital asset? 

(b) How should such a review be conducted? 


(c) Would the Ministry of Defence concede the principle and 
desirability of relocating identified Cantonments/ Military Stations? 


(d) What principles, criteria, methods should be adopted for 
considering any such relocation? 


(e) What are the broad financial implications of such relocations? Can 
the Government articulate the financial principles that will need to 
be subscribed to, prior to considering any such relocation? 


(f) Can this capital asset of the Ministry of Defence be used in any 
other manner/form than as at present? What can those possible 
alternative uses be? 


In reply, the Ministry of Defence stated: 


“Cantonments and Military Stations do occupy some prime urban 
areas in the country. These areas have become prime locations 
over many decades; it is not that prime locations were acquired ab 
initio. The land at a location may be very costly now, as a result of 
heavy investment having been made at that place for providing 
buildings and other infrastructure. If similar facilities, in 
replacement, are to be created elsewhere, it may be neessary to 
spend even more money. For example, when the existing buildings 
and other assets are to be disposed of, what we may get is, on the 
average, 10% to 20% of the capital cost of such buildings. For 
creating equal built-up accommodation elsewhere, the capital cost 
will be about 10 to 20 times, in the time-frame in which it can be 
built. It requires a long lead-time and manpower to create the 
substitute infrastructure. The prime urban areas have the existing 
rates of value only because of the non-availability of prime land for 
residential, commercial and other activities currently in demand at 
that location. In today’s demand and supply position, if the Govt. 
decides to shed all that area at one go the supply position suddenly 
undergoes a change. The economy of the station would be affected 
with the withdrawal of the Forces and their families. Hence, when 
disposing of the property, revenue at the rate at which the land 
was sold in the small transactions that took place in that area, with 
the acuate shortage, would not accrue. So, it is not as if the Govt. 
would be making a lot of money by selling off all the existing 
assets at prime locations and by creating new assets in remote 
areas. 


The families of the Forces require certain facilities for the, 


50 


morale of the Forces and for the development of their children. 
They would like to live in a place which has got adequate facilities 
for education of their children in the best institutions to the highest 
levels possible, and with easy access to the facilities which only 
developed urban areas can provide. Convenient and adequate 
facilities of rail-heads airports, schools, colleges, Universities etc. 
will not be avdilable in the remote areas. Hence, relocating the 
families from the prime urban areas to remote areas will be an 
unpopular measare detrimental to the moral of the Forces. 
Further, the civilian population will again grow around the new 
sites. In course of time, say 25 to 30 years, these areas will also 
become prime lands and the scheme of relocation would again 
come into application. The Armed Forces would thus be used as 
pioneer to develop the area but they would continue to remain 
underprivileged.” 


The Secretary further stated: 


“In macro economic terms large scale presence of Armed Forces in 
terms of use of lands in metropolitan cities is not desirable. I 
concede that, upto a point, where we do not require to be at a 
given place, for whatever reasons, we could well get out of that. 
But, matching with such a reason would have to be the availability 
of resources. It is not a matter of debate that the Ministry of 
Defence is not constitutionally a trader in land. This is in terms of 
initiative. But, of late we have been internally engaged in a 
discussion within the Ministry, in collaboration with the service 
Headquarters, especially of the Army, as to what kind of things we 
should do to see the way out, because, I do not think that any 
Government would be able to provide us with the kind of 
resources which we will, inescapably, require to establish and to 
make up the gaps which still persist in the requirements of the 
Services especially in terms of accommodation.” 


Projection of Funds 


3.14 The land acquisition process cannot be completed in the same year 
in which the administrative sanction is issued. In some cases it may not be 
completed even within the next 3-4 years. Administrative sanction for 
acquisition of land is not based on the budget provision in a particular 
year. The administrative sanction is given on the basis of acceptance of 
necessity for the land and the priority for a particular project in the 
Defence Plan . Land acquisitiom, generally, is the first part of the overall 
requirement of a particular programme in the Defence Plan and the land 
acquisition cost is a part of the programme cost. The yearly budget 
allocation is made on the basis of the progress made on various land 
acquisition sanctions, assessing the likelihood of depositing the 
compensation with the Collector in the particular year and also on an 


51 


assessment of the likely, or actual enhancement of compensation granted 
by the Courts and Arbitrators for the acquisitions done in the part. 
Variations between the fund allocation and the fund utilisation take place 
when, due to administrative problems, the concerned State Govt. is unable 
to complete the due process of law and disburse compenshtion/take over 
possession of land and also when decrees of the District Court/High 
Court/Supreme Court awarding enhanced compensation come up for 
honouring. There is no way to evolve valid forecasts of the time and 
financial effect of the judicial verdicts. In cases where, even by re- 
appropriation adequate funds could not be provided in a particular year, 
the disbursement of compensation and the taken over of property on 
acquisition had, sometimes, to be postponed. For example, in the 
acquisition of land for the Mahajan Field Firing Ranges the fund 
requirement on the basis of the Award under the LA Act had become 
much larger than was acticipated. One of the reasons for this was the low 
rate that had been estimated at the stage of issuance of the Administrative 
Sanction. Another was that while additional benefits to the displaced were 
not provided in the Rajasthan LA Act, the same were ordered by the 
Rajasthan High Court to be paid before taking over possession of the land. 
These additional benefits were, generally, on the lines of those that 
became available under the Central LA Act following the amendments 
made to that Act in 1984. In this case the disbursement of compensation 
and taking over the land had to be delayed, for certain areas, to the next 
financial year. Also, in the case of acquisition of land for the Hema Range 
(near Mhow), the financial constraints have restrained the Govt. from 
completing the acquisition process. Adequate funds were not available to 
disburse compensation, when the Award was declared. 


3.15 According to the Ministry, no plans for growth programme have 
been drawn up. As and when the Users identify their requirement of 
additional lands, the responsibility is cast on the DG DE to provide the 
basic data for decision-making. Once a decision to acquire the land is 
taken, all executive measures are entrusted to the DG DE. It would thus 
be seen that there is no advance assessment of the volume of land that 
may be required in a given time-frame of, say 5-10-15 years. 


3.16 In regard to Defence Land Plans corresponding to Five-Year 
Defence Plans, the Ministry of Defence in a note stated: 


“When Five Year Defence Plans are drawn up, the fund 
requirements for the on-going programmes and the new programmes 
and the expected annual cash-flows are estimated and reflected. For 
this, all the Users are asked to furnish the basic data. 


In the past the DGDE was not asked to project the fund 
requirements and the estimated cash-flow for the acquisition sanctions 
already under execution and the fund requirements for the additional 
land requirements warranted by the new programmes of the Services. 


52 


As such, there have not been any Five Year Defence Land Plans in 
the strict sense, but the fund requirements were being incorporated in 
the Plans on the basis of figures given by the User Services. 


A separate Five Year Plan for Defence Lands may not be altogether 
necessary as land is a component of various defence projects and the 
cost of land is incorporated in the cost of each project. However, 
there is need for greater certainty in the annual allocations for land- 
acquisitions etc. as this would enable the DGDE to meet his 
obligations in a phased manner.” 


Budget Estimates 


3.17 The variations between the revised budget estimates and actual 
expenditure of DGDE during the last ten years have been as follows: 


Year Revised Estimates Actual Variations 
(in crores) (in crores) (in crores) 
ARMY 
1980-81 Rs.17.00 Rs.17.12 (+)Rs.0.12 
1981-82 Rs.10.00 Rs.10.43 (+)Rs.0.43 
1962-83 Rs.10.50 Rs.12.72 (+)Rs.2.22 
1983-84 Rs.19.50 Rs.19.50 NIL 
1984-85 Rs.38.00 Rs.39.98 (+)Rs.1.98 
1985-86 Rs.30.00 Rs.39.08 (+)Rs.9.08 
1986-87 Rs.&2.00 Rs.103.00 (+)Rs.21.00 
1987-88 Rs.24.50 Rs.26.93 (+)Rs.2.43 
1988-89 Rs.17.00 Rs.19.00 (+)Rs.2.00 
1989-90 Rs.20.97 Rs.27.31 (+)Rs.6.34 
NAVY 
1980-81 Rs.0.51 Rs.0.28 (—)Rs.0.23 
1981-82 Rs.0.50 Rs.0.13 (—)Rs.0.37 
1962-83 Rs.3.20 Rs.2.67 (—)Rs.0.53 
1983-84 Rs.0.63 Rs.1.35 (+)Rs.0.72 
1984-85 Rs.1.50 Rs.1.74 (+)Rs.0.24 
1985-86 Rs.1.70 Rs.1.22 (—)Rs.0.48 
1986-87 Rs.6.00 Rs.9,06 (+)Rs.3.06 
1987-88 Rs.3.00 Rs.0.59 (-)Rs.2.41 
1988-89 Rs.4.50 Rs.4.55 (+)Rs.0.05 
1989-90 Rs.1.$2 Rs.0.92 (—)Rs.0.6€0 


53 


AIR FORCE 
1980-81 Rs.0.82 Rs.1.24 (+)Rs.0.42 
1981-82 Rs.0.24 Rs.1.76 (+)Rs.1.52 
1982-83 Rs.2.60 Rs.0.84 (—)Rs.1.76 
1983-84 Rs.2.97 Rs.3.23 (+)Rs.0.26 
1984-85 Rs.2.53 Rs.3.22 (+)Rs.0.69 
1985-86 Rs.4.53 Rs.6.03 (+)Rs.1.50 
1986-87 Rs.16.50 Rs.14.97 (—)Rs.1.53 
1987-88 Rs.10.00 Rs.4.48 (—)Rs.5.52 
1988-89 Rs.2.50 Rs.2.45 (—)Rs.0.05 
1989-90 Rs.6.99 Rs.7.28 (+)Rs.0.29 


Reasons for Variations 


3.18 The variations between the revised estimates and actual expenditure 
during the years are attributable to the following facts:- 


(i) The executive action for acquisition of lands had been entrusted to 
the State Governments. Determination and disbursement of compensation 
till 1982-83 were arranged by the respective State Govts. Except in respect 
of Assam. After making payments from their own funds debit vouchers 
were reaised against the Ministry of Defence through the Accountant 
General of the States. At times these vouchers were not received in time 
and excess expenditure was booked during the subsequent years. 


Army 


(ii) The budgetary allotment and control of the actual expenditure is 
generally kept within the normal variation limit of 10%. But, in the year 
1985-86 there has been substantial increase of Rs. 9 crores in actual 
expenditure owing to urgent demand for possession of the land by the 
Army and requirement of the State Govt. to disburse compensation in 
respect of Mahajan Field Firing Range for taking over possession 
immediately. 


(iii) The variation during the year 1986-87 is due to the erroneous 
booking of charged expenditure alongwith voted since the head of account 
for compilation remains the same. Advance drawn from the Contingent 
Fund also got booked under this head. 


(iv) The variation during the year 1989-90 was inescapable because of 
curtailment of the revised estimates during the fag end of the financial year 
in March 1990 from Rs. 27.97 crores to Rs. 20.97 crores by the Ministry of 
Defence and the Directorate General were simply informed about the 
reduced allotment and hence the expenditure could not be restricted 
because of the commitment already made to the State Govt. 


Air Force 


(v) The budgetary allotment and control of the- actual expenditure is 
generally kept within the normal variation limit of 10%. But in the year 


54 


1987-88, Rs. 4.94 crores was provided to meet liability assuming issuance 
of revised common sanctions in respect of acquisition of land at Jalahalli, 
Bangalore. But, the revised sanctions were issued only during the year 
1989-90 and hence the sum of Rs. 4.94 crores earmarked for the projects 
could not be spent in 1987-88. 


3.19 The committee observed from above details that whereas the Army 
had generally exceeded its budgetary allocations, the Navy and the Air 
Force had not often been able to fully utilise the sums allotted. Grounds 
for variations being similar, the committee enquired what remedial 
measures could be taken to avoid such excess expenditure, or under 
utilisation, of allocations. In their reply, the Ministry of Defence stated:— 


“One of the factors contributing to the variation between the 
budgeted provision and the actual expenditure, apart from those 
listed while furnishing clarifications in respect of Army is that the 
Awards are declared by the Collectors’ after the finalisation of the 
Revised Budget, each year. At the stage of preparation of the 
Revised Budget Estimates, it could be reckoned that certain 
acquisition cases were mature for declaration of the awards and, 
therefore, funds could be deposited for disbursing the due 


compensation. However, the actual amount required is not always . 


known as even the draft Awards are not ready in most cases. Thus, 
as a general practice, the amount reflected in the administrative 
sanctions or some increase over the same, is used for arriving at a 
picture of the fund requirements. For the reasons explained in the 
Preliminary Material, the funds actually required, once the Awards 
are finalised, exceed the provision earlier budgeted on the basis of 
the sanctions prepared much before the Awards are known. Further, 
in many cases the Awards are expected to be declared well before the 
close of the financial year and for which available funds could be 
readily deposited. However, such Awards are not made within the 
year, in all cases, and this leads to under-utilisation of funds. The gap 
between the budgetted figure and the actual utilisation can be bridged 
with better forecast of the estimated cost of acquisition, reduced 
time-lag between the estimation of the cost and the declaration of the 
Award, and adherence to the time-frame expected for progression of 
the legal process when the Revised Budget Estimates are prepared.” 


3.20 The Committee note that 377 cases are at various stages of 
processing for acquisition of 1,72,000 acres of land for the use of Defence 
Services. The estimated cost of these acquisitions is Rs. 165 crores. Apart 
from these there are a large number of other acquisition proposals under 
consideration at various levels of the three Services. Administrative sanction 
for these proposals are yet to be approved by the Government. The 
Committee have also been informed that the estimated cost of acquisition of 
about 95,000 acres of land for K K Ranges is Rs. 140 crores and that the 
cost of acquiring 9.24 lakh acres of land proposed to be acquired for the 


= 


55 


purpose of reorganisation of ranges is about Rs. 1,364 crores. These 
estimates are based on rates prevalent in 1990. The Committee are also 
apprised that for creating additional housing and other related facilities 
approximately Rs. 8,000 crores will be required at current prices. Thus, 
while the requirement of funds totals upto Rs. 10,000 crores, there ones 
possibility of the Government being able to commit funds under the Def 
sector at this extraordinary scale during the next 5-10 years 


3.21 In this context the Committee find it surprising that budgetary 
exercise of the Ministry of Defence has almost entirely side-stepped this 
problem as is evident from the meagre budget provision of Rs. 17 crores 
under the Annual Defence Pian. The Committee are shocked to find that 
this amount is not even sufficient to meet the expenditure in regard to one 
single land award of Rs. 20 crores. They, however, understand that 
Committee on Defence Expenditure is seized of this problem. Without trying 
to pre-empt the recommendations of this Committee, they would, however, 
like to outline certain thrust areas for meeting the yawning resource gap. 


Recommendation 


The Committee desire that the question of rationalising and redeploying 
land and building resources may be pursued vigorously. At the same time 
Government ought to ponder over the principle of self-financing in the 
Defence Services to the extent feasible. This, however, can be possible only 
if funds generated by the Ministry of Defence by sale of surplus land and 
other assets are permitted to be ploughed back into the Defence Services 
Estimates through suitable changes in principles of Finance and Accounting 
or under an informal arrangement with Ministry of Finance. The 
Committee urge the Government to consider this suggestion with utmost 
seriousness. 


Conclusions 


3.22 The Committee understand that enormous delays which had been 
occurring in processing of land acquisition cases, were curtailed when the 
Land Acquisition Act, 1894 was amended in 1967 providing for a maximum 
period of 3 years between the notification of intent of acquiring lands under 
section 4 and declaration of award under section 6 of the Act. Thereafter, 
further measures for speeding up this process were introduced with the 
amendment made in 1984, whereby the maximum period between the stages 
of the acquisition process with reference to section 4 and section 6 of the Act 
has been provided as one year. Similarly the maximum period between the 
issue of final declaration regarding acquisition of land under Section 6 and 
the declaration of the award under section 11 is limited to 2 years. The 
Committee are apprised that this has speeded up the land acquisition 
process. They, however, find that benefits of this amendment are now being 
eroded due to financial constraints faced by DGDE in depositing the 
awarded amounts with the Land Acquisition authorities. That such a thing 
should have happened is a matter of deep regret. 


2146LS-10 


56 


Recommendation 


3.29 The Committee feel that the timely completion of land acquisition 
process and speedy disbursement of compensation to the land owners is 
a tial and therefore, urge the Government in the Ministry of Rural 
—to—tmpress upon the Ministries/Departments to ensure 
allocation so that disbursement of compensation and 
over the possession of land after the declaration of award, are not 
postponed or delayed for any reason whatsoever 


Conclusion 


3.24 The Committee note that variations between the Budget Estimates 
and the actual expenditure incurred by the DGDE in the Ministry of 
Defence, have been a persistant feature. They find that during the span of 
ten years from 1980-81 to 1989-90 it was only once during 1983-84 that the 
actual expenditure was equal to the Revised Budget Estimates. The 
Committee feel that since the Budget Estimates are reviewed from time to 
time during the year till the concluding months, there should not be any 
scope for variations between budget estimates and the actual expenditure. 
Although the Ministry have cited reasons for such variations the Committee 
cannot but look upon this as indicative of a systemic fault in the budgeting 
of expenditure. They feel that there seems to be lack of monitoring of the 
progress of expenditure. 


Recommendation 


The Committee desire that requirement of funds for land acquisition 
should be examined properly so that precise estimates are made thus leaving 
little scope for any variation between the budget estimates and the actual 
expenditure. 


CHAPTER IV 


LAND ACQUISITION 
Land Acquisition Procedure 


4.1 In a note submitted to the Committee the Ministry of Defence 
Stated that the power to take a decision that a piece of additional land 
should be acquired has not been delegated by the Government to any 
lower functionary. When the proposal for land acquisition is to be 
examined and formulated the Users constitute a Board of Officers to 
reconnoitre, examine and select the site and the extent of the land for the 
purpose in view. The representative of the Collector and other relevant 
district level functionaries like the Conservator of Forest, Executive 
Engineers (PWD/Irrigation/Electricity Board) etc. are included in the 
Board of Officers. The estimated cost of the acquisition is furnished by the 
DEO who assesses it on the basis of average of the sales statistics for the 
previous three years ascertained from the local revenue authorities. Every 
proposal for acquisition of land has to be submitted by the User to the 
Government of India with a “No Objection Certificate” obtained from the 
State Government to the proposed acquisition and an estimate of the likely 
compensation for the private and state Government lands involved in the 
proposal. The power to issue the NOC has been delegated by the State 
Government to the Collector only for very small areas of land proposed to 
be acquired. In all other cases the the implications are examined at the 
level of the State Government. In case of urgency, the land is requisitioned 
initially under the RAIP Act, 1952 and possession taken over. If there is a 
permanent requirement, a proposal for acquisition under Land Acquisition 
Act, 1894 is submitted to the Government. However where condition laid 
down in Section 7 of RAIP Act are fulfilled land can also be acquired 
under that Act. 


Once an acquistion proposal is approved by the Government, the 
administrative sanction is issued. The local Defence Estate Officer then 
places a demand with the District Collector for the acquisition of the land. 
Thereafter, the local DEO and the representatives of the User organisation 
inter-act with the District Administration and the State Government for 
taking action under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act. 


4.2 The process of land acquisition begins with issue of a preliminary 
notification under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 in the 
official Gazette and in two daily Newspapers circulating in that locality of 


37 


58 


which atleast one shall be in regional language, indicating that it 
appeared to the Government that the land in the locality is needed 
or is likely to be needed for public purpose. The Collector causes 
public notice of the notification at convenient places in the said 
locality. 


Under Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act it is mandatory for 
the Government to make a declaration that the land is needed for a 
public purpose within one year under the signature of a Secretary to 
the Government or of some officer duly authorised to certify its 
order. This declaration is pronounced after considering the objection, 
if any raised to the preliminary notification under section 4. Every 
declaration is to be published in the offical Gazette and in two daily 
Newspapers circulating in the locality and atleast one in the regional 
language. No declaration is to be made after the expiry of one year 
from the date of publication of the notification. 


Thus a time-limit of one year is provided for completion of all 
formalities between the issue of the preliminary notification under 
Section 4(1) and the declaration for acquisition of specified land 
under Section 6(1) of the IA Act. 


Under Section 11 of the IA Act, the Collector inquires into the 
objections which any person interested had stated pursuant to the 
notice given under Section 9 to the measurement and into the value 
of land at the date of publication of the notification under Section 4(1) 
and makes an award, with the previous approval of the.appropriate 
Government. This award has to be made within a period of 2 years 
from the date of publication of the declaration under Section 6 of the 
Act. If no award is made within that period the entire proceedings 
for the acquisition of the land would lapse. 


Policy Guidelines for Acquisition of Lands 


4.3 The Ministry in a written note stated that there is no formal 
policy regarding acquisition of land for defence purposes on the 
analogy of the Industrial Policy. However the Ministry further stated 
that Local Defence authorities have been directed to keep in mind 
the following policy guidelines before proposal for fresh acquisition of 
land are taken up with respective Service Quarters: 


(i) Carefully explore the possibility of utilising the existing 
defence owned land before projecting proposal for fresh 
acquisition. 

(ii) Ensure that land already available is fully utilised. 

(iii) If the land held by a particular Service is not surplus to its 
requirement (according to the scales prescribed) but is not 
likely to be utilised within the next 10 years, then such areas 


39 


should be made available to any other Service which is in a 
position to more speedily utilise such land. Each such case will 
be examined on merits keeping in view the reasons for the non- 
utilisation of land offered by the Service holding it. 

(iv) Where private land is proposed to be acquired, to ensure that 
the least fertile land suitable to the Defence requirement is 
identified for the proposed acquisition. 


(v) Ensure that, as for as possible, the sites selected for acquisition 
should: 


(a) be away from townships so that the land is not expensive and its 
acquisition is not resisted by the owners; 


(b) be contiguous to the land of existing Cantonment in case it is 
required for its further expansion. However, the economies of 
developing the expanding part of the Cantt. at a distance from 
the existing Cantt. Should be worked out. This should include 
cost of developing separate infrastructure by way of electric and 
water supply and central sewage. Thereafter a view will be 
taken as to how the Cantonment should be expanded. 


The above policy guidelines have not been placed before the Parliament 
as these are executive instructions, which may require sudden change, in 
the event of any unforeseen change in the security scenario. 


4.4 The Committee enquired whether the provision of “Land already 
available” being “fully utilised” has always been observed. The Committee 
also asked the Ministry to give illustrative examples of departures, with 
reasons for such non-observance. In their reply the Ministry of Defence 
stated as follows: 


“When the Board of Officers is comvened to consider a 
requirement, they are furnished information regarding the land 
already available in the general location in which they have to 
identify the land requiremnt for a specific purpose. The 
recommendations for for acquiring additional lands are made by 
the Board. of Officers after taking congnisance of all available 
lands which are suitable to the need under view. Decisions to 
acquire the requisitioned/hired lands also emerge after similar 
examination. No case of departure from these guidelines has 
come to the notice of the Government.” 

4.5 On being asked as to whether the Government instructions of 1982 
on selection of sites cited in paras (a) and (b) of 4.3(v) supra were 
reconcilable, the Ministry of Defence elucidating the position, stated as 
follows: 

“Paras (a) and (b) at S.No. (v) of the guidelines are not 
irreconciable. A new location need not necessarily be very near 
an existing Cantonment. In such a situation the guidelines 


60 


stipulate that the land, which may be acquired at other location, 
should not be expensive and acquisition should not be resisted 
by the owners. But, sometimes the addtional land required may 
be for a small complex. Creating complete infra-structure and 
developing a new township could be costlier than extending the 
Defence infrastructure available at a place. For example, if .any 
additional unit can be kept contiguous to an_ existing 
cantonment/military station the pressure for residential 
accommodation will be reduced to some extent because, for a 
time, they can draw on the existing pool of accommodation in 
the cantonment/military station though the satisfaction level in 
the existing cantonment/military station would come down. 
Extending water supply, electricity and many infra-structural 
facilities would be easier and cheaper. The facilities for 
education and social inter-action like schools, the Institutes for 
Officers, JCOs and ORs etc. available at the station can be used 
by the additional units. The constraint is that, sometimes, 
contiguous to a cantonment/military station additional lands 
cannot be had. In such circumstances this will not work. But, 
there may be locations where this can be had. This has worked 
in practice in some locations. For example, when additional land 
was required for some Units in Meerut, the land contiguous to 
Meerut Cantonment on Meerut—Roorkee road to the north was 
requisitioned and subsequently acquired when additional land 
for housing an additional brigade was required in Ferozpur it 
was acquired contiguous to the Cantt. The Cantt. Board could 
even extend the conservancy services. When land was 
exchanged with the International Airports Authority/DDA, in 
lieu of the land given in Delhi Cantonment for extension of the 
International Airport land was given on behalf of the 
International Airport Authority by the DDA contiguous to the 
Delhi Cantonment, in Mahipalpur. When additional land was 
required for expansion of Hissar military station, the same could 
be had contiguous to the land already acquired. Thus, the 
guidelines are not irreconcilable. 


When Cantonments themselves have become expanding townships and if 
there is no land in close proximity, obviously, criterion (b) referred to in 4. 
(v)(b). will not come into application’’. 


Delays in Acquisition Proposals 


4.6 The Ministry in a note to the Committee stated that the acquisition 
proposals are delayed in a good number of cases because of the following: 


(i) Resistance of the local population. 
(ii) Pressure from environmental activists/special interest groups. 


(iii) Change of the policy/attitude of the State Governments. 


61 


(iv) Delay in the clearance from the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests whose clearnces are necessary. 


(v) Judicial intervention and title disputes etc. 


4.7 The dissatisfaction of the civilian population to land acquisition is 
apparent in the following forms:— 


(i) Resistance to the issue of No Objection Certificate by the 
Collectors/State Governments. | 


(ii) Objections following the notification under Section 4 of the L.A. 
Act calling for objections, if any, to the proposed land acquisition. 


(iii) Claims for higher compensation than that offered. 


(iv) Resistance in handing-over the possession of the acquired land 
after declaration of the Award. 


(v) References and requests for arbitration, for enhancement of 
compensation. 


Cost over-run 


4.8 In regard to cost over-run experienced in acquiring land the Ministry 
of Defence stated that this happens mainly due to the following factors:— 


(i) The estimates reflected in the Board Proceedings/sactions are 
inescapably evolved on very rough rates, based on the preceding 
three years average recorded sales noted at the time of drawing up 
the proposals or processing the sanction. The actual rate has to be 
the price at the time of the section 4 notification, which 
unavoidably issues at a much later date. This rate is not an average 
for a block of any three years. Often, there is a gap of a few years 
between the dates of the sales adopted to prepare the estimates for 
the sanction and the issuance of the sanction. Thereafter, a few 
months pass before the notification u/s 4 of the Act appears and 
the escalation for this period is not built into the estimates. 


(ii) The economic development (which is quite speedy in most cases) 
taking place in the vicinity pushes up the prices of the land in the 
interregum, often exponentially. 


(iii) Court decisions enhancing the compensation payable in specific 
cases have vastly raised the cost of land acquisition, thereby very 
sharply raising the project costs. 


(iv) With the growing local resistance to the acquisition of lands, the 
State Govts. have been progressively demanding high scales of 
payment for the rehabilitation of the affected persons. 


62 


4.9 Enquired whether it was not possible to improve cost estimates 
process by taking above factors into account at the time of survey or when 
NOCs are obtained, the Ministry of Defence stated: 


‘It is possible to improve the estimate making on the financial effect 
of acquisition of the land and also to reduce the gap between the 
estimated cost and the actual effect. Often the average of the sales 
over a three years period available at the time the Board Proceedings 
are drawn up, is taken to reflect the cost in the sanction. But the 
amount payable is on the basis of sales at a distant point of time. If 
the processing time for Board Proceedings is reduced and the 
administrative sanction for acquisition is approved soon thereafter, the 
deviation is cost can be lesser. One of the reasons for the delay in 
sanction is also the non-availability of funds for the capital investment 
required, even though at certain levels of the Armed Forces creating 
the infrastructure at new locations is considered an operational and 
strategic necessity. By adopting the revised formula the gap between 
the estimated cost and the actual cost can perhaps be reduced. 


By entering into negotiated awards under Section 11(2) the long drawn 
out legal process for enhancement of compensation and payment of 
interest of the intervening period, which rise to considerable amount, could 
perhaps be avoided. 


It is non-payment of full compensation for proper resettlefnent and the 
lower rate of compensation admissible that leads to high resistance to 
requisition of land under the RAIP Act. Hence, it is fair that the formulas 
for compensation under both the Act should be comparable. Ministry 
further informed the Committee that liberal enhancement of cost by 
Courts and litigations have arisen mainly, in Punjab due to the linkage 
established in the Punjab and Haryana High Court in respect of 
compensation under RAIP Act. Once the distinctions are removed the 
occasions for litigation, and enhancoment, would also come down”. 


Delegation of powers to State Governments 


4.10 The Committee desired to know the nature of interaction by 
Ministry of Defence with the State Governments for effecting speedy 
acquisition of land. The Ministry stated that the due process of legel action 
is carried out by the State Government and its subordinate officers in close 
association with Defence: Estate Organisations. 


4.11 The Committee enquired why the Ministry of Defence, as the user. 
ought not to process cases of land acquisition -itself, particularly when 
Officials of D.E.Q. are invariably consulted by the State Government at all 
stages of proceedings, the Ministry in a note clarifying the position: stated 


63 


that the executive function of the Central Goverment has been delegated 
to the State Government under Article 258 of the Constitution. 


“The officers of the Indian Defence Estates Service are conversant 
with and competent to discharge responsibilities regarding land 
acquisition. In the Central Govt. only the Ministry of Defence has got 
a complete field and headquarters Organisation capable of taking on 
the responsibilities of land acquisition. No other Department of the 
Government of India has such network of qualified persons. From the 
days before the network was created under the Ministry of Defence, it 
has been the practice that all responsibilities for acquisition of land for 
the purpose of the Central Government were discharged through the 
State Govt. agencies, acquisition of land without the co-operation of 
the State Govt. is not practicable. Only the land records maintained 
by the Revenue Department of the State Government are the legally 
admissible evidence, as prima-facie proof, of the ownership/rights on 
the land. Hence, any person entrusted with the task of land 
acquisition should have access to this document including the 
opportunity to get it updated, it should not happen that the same sites 
of land are processed for acquisition by various authorities. If various 
departments of the Government of India and the State Government 
start acquisition proceedings without going through a single’ nodal 
agency there would be numerous problems. For valuation of the lands 
access has to be had to all the registered sale deeds to find out the 
transaction data. These are under the custody and control of the State 
Government. Furthermore, there is the problem of the law and order 
if a large number of people are to be removed from their places of 
residence/work. Problems of relief and rehabilitation may also arise. 
Maintenance of law and order provision of relief and rehabilitation 
etc. are the responsibility of the State Govt. These responsibilities can 
be discharged only through close association with the State authorities. 
For various reasons it is always advantageous to have the acquisition 
done through the State Govt. agencies. 


However, this does not suggest that they should be given a carte 
blanche on whether some part of the site selected should at all be 
acquired, what rate of compensation should.be given what measures 
should be provided for relief and rehabilitation and how enhancement 
of compensation through Courts should be dealt with. The Central 
Government should have a decisive say in such matters. Preferably, 
the award of compensation should be in consultation with the Ministry 
of Defence, through the Defence Estates Organisation. It can happen 
that people are aggrieved with the quantum of compensation awarded. 
Anybody who is aggrieved with the quantum of compensation 
awarded can seek judicial adjudication through a reference under 
Section 18 of the Land Acquisition Act. The acquiring Department 
itself cannot do this as the Act provides that the Court which is 


2146LS-11 


64 


considering a land reference under section 18 shall not reduce the 
compensation awarded by the Collector. Hence when the State 
Government and the Collector declare an Award, without suitable 
consultation with the Defence Ministry, the latter can be saddled with 
a quantum of compensation which it cannot get reduced. For this 
reason, it is necessary that the State Government exercises the power 
of approving the Award only in consultation with the Central 
Government. The litigations regarding compensation could be through 
the DEO and the processing of an enhancement claims should not be 
at the mercy/neglect/indulgence of the State Govt. officials whose 
accountability in the matter is not under scrutiny. A decision whether 
any site should be acquired or not or whether the Ministry should 
withdraw from the acquisition, should also rest with the Ministry.” 


4.12 The text of the notification entrusting the function to the State 
Govt. in respect of some of the States is reproduced below:— 


S.O. 782 (E}—In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (11 of 
Article 258 of the Constitution of India and of all other powers enabling 
him in this behalf and in supersession of previous notifications on the 
subject in so far as they relate to the States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, 
Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, Orissa, 
Tamilnadu, Tripura and West Bengal, the President, hereby entrusts to the 
Government of the aforesaid States, with their consent, the functions of 
the Central Government as under:— 


(i) The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894) except the functions 
exercisable by the Central Government under the proviso to sub-section 
(1) of Section 55 of the said Act; and 


(ii) The Land Acquisition (Companies) Rules, 1963, in relation to the 
acquisition of land for the purpose of the Union in these States. 


Subject to the following conditions, namely: 


(a) that im the exercise of such functions, the respective Governments 
shall comply with such general and special directions as the Central 
Government may, from time to time issue; and 


(b) that, notwithstanding the entrustment, the Central Government may 
itself exercise any of the said functions should it deem fit to do so in any 
case’. ~ 
Entrustments to other State Governments are on identical lines. 

4.13 It would be noticed that the function exercisable by the Central 
Govt. under Section 55(1) of the Act which is the power to make rules for 
the guidance of officers in all matters connected with the enforcement of 
the Act, has not been delegated. The entrustment of the function has been 
subject to the condition that the respective State Govt. Shall comply with 
general and special direction as the Central Govt may, from time to time, 
issue and that, notwithstanding the entrustment the Central Govt. may 


65 


itself exercise any of the said functions should it deem fit to do so in any 
case’. The Central Govt. exercise certain functions despite their 
entrustment. For example, Section 4(1) of the Act states that “whenever it 
appears to the appropriate Government that land in any locality is needed 
or is likely to be needed for any public purpose or for a comipany a 
notification to that effect shall be published in the official 
gazette........ ”? While the State Govt. can exercise the aforesaid 
power, such exercise can obviously be only after the Central Government 
itself has come to the view that the land is needed or is likely to be needed 
for a Central Government purpose. The State Government cannot suo- 
moto take such a decision. Again, in Section 5(A) (2) it has been provided 
that the objections raised against the acquisition shall be submitted to the 
decision of the Government and ‘the decision of the appropriate 
Government on the objections shall be final’’. If the State Government, 
acting on behalf of the Central Government, decides to uphold an 
objection not to acquire the land, it is only fair that such a decision should 
be taken in consultation with the Central Government. Otherwise, the 
State Government could nullify the decision of the Central Government. 
Again, if the State Government has reservations of making a declaration 
under section 6 it is only fair that such a decision should be taken in 
consultation with the Central Government. Section 48(1) of the Act 
provides that except in the case provided for in Section 36 the Government 
shall be at liberty to withdraw from the acquisition of any land of which 
possession has not been taken. It is only appropriate that this power is 
exercised by the State Government only with the concurrence from the 
Central Government when the acquisition is done for the Central 
Government. Otherwise, the.whole effort of the Central Government 
could be nullified by the State Govt.” 


4.14 On being asked to state the views on exercise of powers of the 
appropriate Government, insofar as the acquisition for purposes of the 
Central Government, delegated to the State Government in accordance 
with Article 258(1) of the Constitution read with in Department of Rural 
Development SO. No. 782(E) of 1985 as also to the approval of the award 
with the prior concurrence of the Ministry of Defence, and opening of 
award under Section 28A of LA Act without clearance from the Ministry 
of Defence, the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Rural 
Development) in a note to the Committee stated: 


“Once the power to acquire the land has been delegated by the 
Central Govt. to the State Govt., to interfere with the authority of the 
State Govt. to decide on the objections received from the affected 
persons would neither be desirable nor in accordance with law. It will 
also not be in the interest of the dispensation of justice to require the 
State Govt. to consult requisitioning agency before deciding on 
objections or take decisions for exclusion of certain areas from 
acquisition or to withdraw acquisition proceedings under Section 48 of 


66 


the Act. Besides, State Govts. are no less custodian of public interest 
than the requisitioning Central Ministry. It is however, always open to 
the requisitioning authority to have informal consultation with the 
State Govt. and impress on them the need to over-rule the objections 
wherever necessary if they are in the public interest. The Department, 
therefore, does not favour any provision for the ‘appropriate Govt.’ to 
consult a requisitioning agency before deciding on the objections 
received from affected parties. 


Under Section 28 A of the Act, the reopening of the award made 
under Section 11 by the Collector on the basis of a court judgement is 
fully in consonance with law. No prior clearance of requisitioning 
authority is needed for taking action under section 28 A. Since under 
Section 28A, awards are opened on the basis of the order of the Court 
in respect of land covered by the same notification under Section 4(1), 
the question of doubting the admissibility and reasonableness does not 
arise. Any consultation with the requisitioning authority prior to 
initiating action under section 28 A “would adversely affect the interest 
of land losers and defeat the objective with which this amendment was 
inserted in 1984. 


The declaration of award is in the nature of a judgement quasi- 
judicial proceedings. The competent authority is expected to apply its 
mind to all aspects of the nature of land, location, its productivity, 
market value etc. and make an objective assessment of the value of 
the land. Under the law the requisitioning authority is not barred from 
giving its views about the value of the land if it so wishes before the 
award is made. But it would amount to interference in the judicial 
process, prejudicing the mind of the competent authority and 
tempering with his independent judgement, if provision for 
consultation with requisitioning authority is made before the 
declaration of the award. Therefore, the Department of Rural 
Development is not in favour of any amendment to Section 11 which 
has the effect of providing for prior concurrence of the requisitioning 
authority. It may be relevam to mention here that Section 11(1) 
provides that no award shall be made by the Collector without the 
previous approval of ‘appropriate Government’. 


The award made by the competent authority is, therefore, not 
accepted routinely but is scrutinised by the higher officers in the 
appropriate Govt. for ascertaining whether it has been made properly 
and fairly with due application of mind as per the prescribed rules and 
procedures. 


The Department, therefore, is of the opinion that neither Section 28 A 
nor Section 5A(2) need any change and should be retained in the present 
form.”’ 


4.15 On being asked to state their comments on a view expressed by the 


67 


Ministry of Defence that the existing arrangement so far as it enabled the 
Land Acquisition Authority to sustain objections or to take other such 
actions during the process of land acquisition had the potential to nullifying 
the decision of the Central Government to acquire land,.the Department 
of Rural Development in a note to the Committee have stated: 


‘Ministry of Defence have taken the position that their proposal to 
‘acquire land should not be questioned or amended in any way. This 
view cannot be accepted as it would be not only against the provisions 
of law on land acquisition but also principles of natural justice. The 
acquisitioning authority has to convince the competent authority why 
particular piece of land is needed. No exception can be made in this 
regard for any specific requisitioning authority under the law. Further 
the principles of natural justice also demand that the persons affected 
by acquisition should have an opportunity to put in their objections in 
writing before a decision is taken to acquire the land. The State 
Government as the quasi-judicial authority, therefore, has to look into 
these objections and also the considerations of public purpose as 
indicated by the requisitioning authority before it takes a decision 
whether to modify, reject or go ahead with the proposal. Any repeal 
or modification of these procedures would go against the provisions of 
the Constitution. It is relevant to mention here that in cases of 
urgency, there is arrangement for speedy acquisition of land Under 
Section 17(4) without observing the provision of Section 5 A which 
permits filing of objections against the acquisition. 


In view of the above, no changes are considered necessary in the 
statute by the Department.” 


4.16 Enquired why urgency clause under Section 17 of the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894 was not more often invoked for acquisition of land 
as the seller (owner) got the connpensation quickly and the Government 
got the possession quickly, the DGDE during evidence explained the 
position as follows: 


‘‘When urgency clause is invoked, extra compensation at 6 per cent 
interest was payable and no on-account payment was payable until the 
Act was amended in 1984. On the question of extra financial liability, 
the Finance Ministry had often asked us not to invoke the urgency 
clause. The advantage that accrues by invoking urgency clause is that 
the project can be started early and the capital cost of the project, will 
be less. This advantage possibly had been lost sight of. After 
amending the Act in 1984. It is possible to make on-account payment: 
When invoking this urgency clause the affected person loses an 
opportunity raise an objection against acquisition of his land. In the 
normal process, after notification is issued, there is a period of four 
weeks given for a person afiiected to raise objection. Normally such 
objections are considered and disposed of. In mbst of the cases, it is 


68 


rejected. So, if it is adopted as a standard practice, this provision of 
giving an opportunity to the affected person to raise objection is 
denied.”’ 


Lapse of Proceedings 


4.17 There have been instances of lapse of land acquisition proceedings 
on the ground of non-declaration of award, under Section 6 of the L.A. 
Act, by the State Governments within the prescribed time, as pointed out 
by the Ministry of Defence. -The Committee asked the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Rural Development) what measures they 
would suggest to meet the situation. In reply, the Ministry stated: 


“Whenever the land acquisition proceedings lapse on account of 
non-declaration of the award the State Govt. has to initiate 
acquisition proceedings denovo. However, where the requisitioning 
authority vigorously pursues its proposal for acquisition with the State 
Govt., instances of lapse of acquisition proceedings are rare. In any 
case, lapse of a proceeding is an ad‘ministrative problem and it is 
possible to overcome this through better liasioning with the State 
Govt. by the requisitioning authority.” 


4.18 The Ministry of Defence stated that there are 4 major cases where 
appeals not got filed in time and dismissed by the Appellate Courts as 
barred by limitation. 


Similarly the Committee were informed about five instances of 
withdrawal of notifications of land acquisition either at the instance of the 
Ministry of Defence or the State Governments in recent years in the 
context of resistance from the local population against the acquisition, in 
case even though the Award had been declared and compensation had 
been disbursed. 


4.19 The Committee enquired how the Ministry of Defence disposed of 
award cases where State Governments did not take prior clearance. 
Whether such awards were in accordance with provisions relating to 
acquisition and payment of compensation under the Land Acqusition Act, 
1894. The Ministry of Defence in their reply stated: | 


“The Central Government has either to acquiesce in the award 
declared by the Collector or to withdraw from the acquisition 
proceedings in pursuance of Sec. 48 of the Act. Withdrawal from 
acquisition does not solve the problem. Land is still required for the 
purpose for which the acquisition’ was started. There is no guarantet 
that after withdrawal from the proceedings and payment of 
compensation under sub-section (2) ibid for the damage if any 
suffered, an alternative site in acceptable time frame and at 
reasonable compensation can be had. Most often, there is no 
alternative. In the cases where the Urgency Clause under Section 17 
has been invoked and possession of the site had been taken over 


69 


before declaration of the award the scope of even withdrawal from 
the acquisition proceedings is not there. The Central Government is 
saddled with what the Collector/State Government has awarded.” 


Improvements in LA Act, 1894 and RAIP Act, 1952 


4.20 After the Land Acquisition Act was enacted, in 1894, the 
requirement of land for the Services and other Defence Organisations was 
met by invoking the provisions of this Act. In major aspects the present 
Land Acquisition Act retains the structure introduced in 1894. 


4.21 During the World War II a need was recognised for occupying 
various lands urgently but, not necessarily on a permanent basis. All the 
required sites could not, obviously, be secured through hiring agreements. 
Hence, the Defence of India Act, 1939 invested powers to requisition 
properties and to hold on to them by paying recurring compensation as 
well as compensation for damages, if any, done. The law also catered for 
the acquisition of property by following a simpler legal process than what 
had been provided in the Land Acquisition Act 1894. The rationale is that 
possession of the property being a “fait accompli” and the property having 
been put to effective defence use, the elaborate scheme of the LA Act was 
not warrarited. 


4.22 The role of the Armed Forces underwent a sea change after 
Independence and the country adopted a Parliamentary democratic system. 
The main objective being the general welfare of the people, the policy 
underwent changes, over a period of time, to meet the overall objectives of 
the State. 


Policy adjustments/changes are as brought out through successive 
amendments to the LA Act and the RAIP Act. These were introduced by 
the Govt. recognising the problems and hardships faced by the 
dispossessed persons. The studies/analysis preceding these changes were 
undertaken by the nodal Ministry administering the LA Act and the RAIP 
Act and not by the Ministry of Defence. The nodal Ministry for the LA 
Act is the Ministry of Rural Development (earlier, the Ministry of 
Agriculture) and that for the RAIP Act is the Urban Development 
Ministry. The issues arising from land acquisition by recourse to the LA 
Act had been examined in depth in the Rural Development Ministry 
before the requisite amendments were made in 1984. 


There has been change in the Government’s policy only to the extent of 
the revision of the statutory provisions regarding acquisition and 


compensation. The supplementary element included in the 1980s, related 
to the re-settlement and rehabilitation measures for the dispossessed 


persons. 
Additional provisions in RAIP Act, 1952 


4.23 Section 8(1) of the RAIP Act, 1952 had provided for payment of 
recurring compensation for the requisitioned property. This had not 


70 


provided for any periodic revision of the recurring compensation which in 
fact is a “rent”. No provision for revision of rent had existed in the 
Defence of India Act, 1939/1962 or the rules made thereunder. An 
amendment was made in March 75 by inserting Sub-section (2) (a) to Sec. 
8 of the RAIP Act to provide that where a property had been subject to 
requisition under the Act for a period of 5 years or longer immediately 
preceding the commencement of the Amendment Act in 1975 the recurring 
compensation be reviewed and, thereafter, at 5 years interval. This gave a 
relief to the dispossessed persons in the form of a more reasonable rent 
compensating for inflation and the loss of accrued benefit (on account of 
the development that may have taken place in the vicinity). 


4.24 When enquired whether there had been any debate within or 
outside the Parliament in regard to Policy or land acquisition the Ministry 
stated: मै 


“There were debates in the Parliament and outside on the subject 
preceding the amendments incorporated in the two statutes. There 
were also inter-Ministrial consultations. The Ministry of Defence in 
turn, consulted services Headquarters, DGDE, etc. The policy 
changes introduced already had been mentioned in preceding paras.” 


Payment of Compensation 


4.25 Government also had recognised that in the matter of deciding the 
award of compensation under the LA Act the Central Government had 
practically no say. To remedy the situation a new provision, as-below, was 
incorporated in Section 11(1) of the LA Act. 


“Provided that no award shall be made by the Collector under this 
sub-section without the previous approval of the appropnate Govt. or 
of such officer as the appropriate Govt. may authorise in this behalf. 
Provided further that it shall be competent for the appropriate 
Government to direct that the Collector may make such award 
without such approval in such class of cases as the appropriate Govt. 
may specify in this behalf”. 


It also introduced a new Sub-Section (2) as follows: 


“Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-Section(1) if at any stage 
of the proceedings, the Collector is satisfied that all the persons 
interested in the land who appeared before him have agreed in 
writing on the matters to be included in the award of the Collector in 
the form prescribed by rules made by the appropriate Government he 
may without making further enquiry make an award according to the 
terms of such agreement. The determination of compensation for any 
land under Sub-section (2) shall not in any way affect the 
determination of compensation in respect of other lands in the same 
locality, or elsewhere in accordance with other ptovisions of this 
Act.” 


71 


4.26 With these provisions it was envisaged that the State Governments 
would not give awards without clearance from the Central Government 
and that a negotiated compensation could be given to the dispossessed 
persons avoiding all litigations and consequent extra expenditure and delay 
for the dispossessed persons as well as the Government. However, the 
potential to enter into a negotiated award, as authorised in Sub-section (2), 
has not been exploited. Even though the law gave the opportunity and the 
power to the Central Government to control the award, in practice the 
entire power of the Central Government (except the power to make rules 
and to take decisions on acquisition) has been entrusted to the State Govt. 
by the Presidential order under Article 258 of the Constitution. However, 
some State Govts. take the clearance of the Central Govt. to the draft 
award. Others do not take such clearance and act as they like. 


4.27 The Ministry further stated that the increase in the solatium over 
and above the market value was granted to land owners under the LA Act 
recognising the fact that even when lands of comparable advantage/price 
were available for the dispossessed person to buy (out of the com- 
pensation awarded) he was required to incur additional expenditure in the 
form of stamp duties and registration charges on the transfer of the 
property. Unless compensated for this he would become poorer. With such 
charges going up in many States, 15% solatium was not adequate relief for 
the compulsory nature of the acquisition. The enhancement of solatium to 
30% was given to provide relief on this account. 


Earlier, when the market value of the land as on the date of Section 4 
notification was adopted and the award and disbursement of compensation 
was made 2 to 3 years or still later, the money which the dispossessed 
person was getting was not adequate for getting equal substitute land 
because of the escalation in the land price and the fall in the real money 
value, in the interregnum. With the additional benefit of 12% per annum 
authorised under new Section 23(1-A), this handicap has been removed, to 
some extent, though depending upon the location and the activities the 
actual appreciation may be more or less than 12% per annum. 


Till the amendment made in 1984, when land was taken over invoking 
the urgency clause, relief to facilitate resettlement of the displaced was not 
given. With the introduction of Sub-section (3-A) to Section 17, before 
taking possession of the land under Sub-section (1), the Collector shall 
tender payment of 80% of the compensation for such land (as estimated by 
him) to the persons interested and entitled thereto. This is a great relief. 

Getting compensations revised by recourse to Sec. 18 (through land 
references) has been time-consuming and costly for the poor persons who 
could not engage the services of a counsel or indefinitely wait for relief 
considering the long delay in the judicial process. Section 28-A, which is as 
follows, was introduced in 1984: 

“(1) Where in an award under this part the court allows to the: 


2146LS-12 


72 


applicant any amount of compensation in excess of the amount 
awarded by the Collector under section 11, the persons interested in 
. the other land covered by the same notification under Section 4, 

b-section (1) and who are also aggrieved by the award of the 
Collector may, notwithstanding that they had not made an application 
to the Collector, under Section 18, by written application to the 
collector within three months from the date of the award of the Court 
require that the amount of compensation payable to them may be re- 
determined on the basis of amount of compensation awarded by the 
Court.” 


The Collector can award the enhanced compensation. This provides 
relief to the poor persons, who cannot afford to embark on costly 
litigation. 

Time Limits for completing Acquisition Proceedings 


4.28 Para 5 of the “Rules for the Acquisition, Custody, Relinquishment, 
etc. of Military Lands of India (A.C.R. Rules) 1944 provides that the 
Chief Revenue Officer of the District or some other officer appointed by 
him for the purpose is the authority who will arrange the detailed process 
pf land acquisition and that the State Government and their subordinate 
officers will be regarded generally as experts in the administration of land 
and as advisers on any political or other questions affecting the inhabitants 
of the area which may arise in the course of land acquisition. Every 
proposal for acquisition of land has to be sybmitted by the Users to the 
Government of India with a “No Objection Certificate” from the State 
Government to the proposed acquisition and an estimate of the likely 
compensation for the private and State Government lands involved in the 
proposal. The power to issue the ‘NOC’ has been delegated by the State 
Government to the Collector only for very small areas of land proposed to 
be acquired. In all other cases the implications are examined at the level of 
the State Government. Fer getting the NOC, the Board of Officers, 
constituted by the Department and including the Collector as well as other 
district level functionaries, liaise the State Government at appropriate 
levels. This effort is supplemented by direct intervention by Senior Officers 
at the Command Headquarters, Army Headquarters and the Ministry and 
sometimes even by the RRM/RM with the State Ministers/Chief 
Ministers. Such matters are .also discussed at the Civil—Military Liaison 
Conferences, held annually. Some State Governments have also 
constituted Standing Committees to examine land acquisition proposals. 
For example, Punjab has constituted District Level Land Acquisition 
Committees and a State Level Joint Committee. Other State Govts. have 
still not formalised such arrangements. The Punjab Government has even 
prescribed a PERT table to monitor the action at various stages and to 
ensure that there are no lapses. 


4.29 In a preliminary note to the Committee thé Ministry stated that 


73 


according to ACR Rule, 1944 the State Government and their subardinate 
officers are to be regarded generally advisors on any political or other 
questions affecting the inhabitants of the area which may arise in the 


course of land acquisition. The Committee desired to know how the advice 


on “political or other questions affecting the inhabitants-of-the area’-—-wes 


given and by whom and what was the objective behind it and how ' 


differences of opinion, if any were resolved? Explaining the position, the 
Ministry of Defence stated as follows:— 
“Para 9.1 of Standing Order No. 28 (Land Acquisition No. 28) of the 
Punjab Govt., issued under the Land Administration Manual, 
contains the following:— 

In no circumstances shall any religious place of worship, shrine, 
tomb, graveyard or any immovable property attached to any 
institution, the boundaries of which are continuous to the site of 
the same, be acquired compulsorily. If any other immovable 
property attached to any such institution or any Wakf property be 
required, the Collector must refer the matter to Govt. in the 
Acquiring Department which should consult at least four legislators 
of the community concermed before taking action (where however 
the number of legislators is less than four, he/they should be 
consulted). : 

(2) Similar provisions exist in the instructions issued by the J&K 
Govt. In addition, the Cabinet Decision No. 90 dated 

19.3.1982 of the J&K Govt. contains the following:— 
lt is hereby ordered that the demands for land by Defence Forces shall 
be examined and considered by the Committee constituted under Govern- 
ment Order No. 2364-GD of 1980 dated 28.11.1980 read with Government 
Order No. 2459-GD of 1980 only in respect of lands other than the 

following types of the lands namely:— 

(a) Land cultivated or cultivable for any agricultural crop of saffron 
or fodder production or which is an orchard or vegetable 
growing; 

(b) Land earmarked for or which can be used for purposes of 
industrial or planned development; 

(c) Land within a radius of 10 Kms. from the limits of a city 
Municipality, Town or Notified Area or demarcated Forest; 

(d) Land within 5 Kms. of any place of tourist interest, shrine or 
pilgrimage, 

(९) Urban and Urbanisable land; 

(f) Land which is situated within 1/4 Kms.: from the National 
Highway or State Highway; 

(g) Land within one Km. of lakes, canals, rivers and springs, etc. 

(h) Land where considerable population/houses are invoived;. 


s 
¢ 


74 


(i) Pastures and grazing lands; and 


(j) Land though uncultivable or barren is likely to fall within the 
command area of any irrigation scheme. 


(3) ‘Such aspects are taken cognisance of by the State Government 
while considering the issuance of the No Objection Certificate 
for acquisition of land. Again the Standing Instructions of 
Punjab, for example, contain that while making a reference to 
the Collector of the District the’ departmental officer shall also 
ensure that the land to be acquired for non-agricultural purposes 
does not disturb the agricultural needs of the country and does 
not cause avoidable hardship to small land owners. It is also to 
be .considered by the State Government whether the 
displacement of the residents of the area is involved and 
whether the proposal could create resettlement, law and order 
or rehabilitation problems. 


(4) In all such matters, if the Central Govt. is unable to persuade 
the State Government to the User’s perception, the opinion of 
the State Govt. prevails and is adopted.” 


4.30 In a npte explaining reasons for delays in land acquisition 
proceedings despite statutory provisions, and what could be done now to 
further reduce them, the Ministry of Defence have stated: 


“The impression that in a majority of cases the time limit is 
invariably exceeded in post 1984 cases is not factually correct. The 
situations where the time limit is exceeded, and hence the 
acquisition proceedings have lapsed, are very rare.” 


The Ministry of Defence furnished details of few. exceptional cases 
of lapsed land acquisition proceedings on certain ground including 
exceeding the stipulated time limit. | 


4.31 Explaining the position, the Ministry of Defence added: 


“A further reduction in the tums-penods reflected in the LA Act 
for various activities is not desirable. The time limit for various 
activities should have relativity to the volume of work involved. 
When vast areas of land are to be acquired a large number of 
persons are affected. A large number of notices have to be served, 
objections/claims received etc. Those have to be consi-dered after 
giving the affected persons opportunities for being heard. These 
activities take time. The larger the acquisition area, the more the 
time required. It may be, when small acquisitions, say 5 acres/10 
acres or even 100 acres are involved, the process can be done 
early. When hundreds of acres of land and people are involved, it 
is unrealistic to expect that in a shorter time the due process can 
be completed to the satisfaction of all concerned.” 


75 


4.32 The Committee desired to know whether Miristry of Defence were 
satisfied with the present time limits and whether such time limits were 
adhered to in reality. The Ministry in their reply stated as follows:. 

“Though there have been some aberrations, we are satisfied with 
the present time-limits. In cases of extreme urgency, the time-limit 
is not a serious constraint, as section 17 of the Act can be invoked. 
The time required for normal processing will depend, on the 
volume of work (extent of area) involved in the acquisition. If the 
period is curtailed statutofily despite reasonable efforts, some 
acquisition cases may lapse and de novo costly’ proceedings may 
become necessary. If the area to be taken over is not large, by 
meaningful dedication to duty, the task can be accomplished in 
good time. The present parameters appear to be fair.” 


4.33 Asked why the Ministry of Defence ought not also have a PERT- 
table for monitoring action at all stages of the proceedings, the Ministry of 
Defence have stated their views as follows: 


“More than a PERT Table adherence to give time schedules is 
required by all authorities, at various levels. Even though a PERT 
Table indicating the time-frame for various stages of actions (as 
per the instructions issued under the Punjab Land Administration 
Manual) is available, in actual practice there are variations from 
the prescribed time-frame in the majority of cases, for varying 
reasons.” 

4.34 DGDE is required to ensure, and the Ministry to monitor, the 

following: 
(1) Timely placement of demand for acquisition, once the Govt. 
sanction is issued. 


(2) Publication of notification under Section 4. 
(3) Publication of declaration under Section 6 (within the period of 
one year available). 
(4) Submission of draft award in three to six months before the 
expiry of 2 years from the declaration under section 6. 
(5) Deposit of compensation as soon as the award is declared and. 
disbursement of the compensation. 
(6) Early finalisation of reference cases so as to reduce interest 
hability.” 
4.35 In a note about the State Government having prescribed the time 
limits for completing various stages of acquisition proceedings, the Ministry 
of Agriculture (Department of Rural Development) stated as follows: 


“The Central Land Acquisition Act, 1894 is not applicable to the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir and Nagaland Assembly has not 


76 


adopted it for enforcement in the State. Of the remaining States/ 
UTs, we have intimation about ten States and Union Territories 
having prescribed time limits for completing various stages of 
acquisition proceedings. These are Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Sikkim, West Bengal, Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli and Pondicherry.” 


4.36 Enquired whether the Government had taken up the matter with 
the State Govts. for prescribing time-limit in accordance with the L.A. 
(Amendment) Act, 1894, the Department of Rural Development stated 
the position as follows: 


“Soon after the amendment of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 in 
1984, the Department of Rural Development in January, 1985 
addressed the State Govts. and UT Administrations on the need to 
adhere to the time frame prescribed in the law for completing 
different stages of acquisition proceedings. In August, 1987, their 
attention was again drawn towards this aspect and they were urged 
to fix appropriate time limits, if not already done, for various 
stages of work and processes relating to land acquisition 
proceedings so as to ensure completion of all formalities within the 
over-all time frame laid down in the Act. 


This point was also discussed in the Land Acquisition 
Conference held in July, 1989. The following consensus arrived at 
in the Conference on the subject also emphasises on fixing time 
limits for completion of various processes under L.A. Act. 


In view of the time limit specified in the Land Acquisition Act 
for disposal of proceedings and the consequences which follow if 
the proceedings are not disposed of within the time limit, there is 
need for greater delegation of powers for various administrative 
purposes. The States should also specify time limits for completion 
of various processes of land acquisition work in the interest of 
expeditious disposal of proceedings. 


The consensus of the Conference has been sent to all States/UTs 
for necessary action.” 


Monitoring and Review of Land Acquisition Process 


4.37 In a written note to the Committee the Ministry stated that there is 
a mechanism for monitoring the progress of land acquisition cases. The 
concerned officers in the Ministry of Defence, Services HQrs., DGDE and 
local levels entrusted with such work keep a close watch on the progress of 
acquisition proposals. Once an acquisition proposal is approved by the 
Government, the local Defence Estate Officer places a demand with the 
District Collector for the acquisition of the land. Thereafter, the local 
DEO and the representative of the User organisations inter-act with the 
District Administration and the State Govt. for taking action under the 


77 


provisions of the land Acquisition Act. The State Government invariably 
engage special staff for expediting L.A. cases for defence purposes. The 
LA Act 1894 itself prescribes certain periods for the due processing of the 
required action. The acquisition proceedings begin with: the issue of a 
notification u/s 4 of the L.A. Act. It is mandatory to make a declaration 
u/s 6 within one year and, thereafter, the Award is to be declared u/s 11 
within a period of two years. The Defence Estates Organisation monitors 
cases to ensure timely action so that the acquisition proceedings do not 
lapse. In practice, drafts of all notifications are prepared by the Defence 
Estates Organisation. Budgeting of the expenditure and its review takes 
place four times a year at the levels of the Defence Estates Officer, the 
Director, DE, the Command, the Directorate General, DE and the 
Ministry. At these stages, the progress of every case is reviewed. 
Furthermore, periodical reviews are done and action taken to remove 
bottlenecks. The User Organisation also monitor the progress at various 
stages. 


The administrative problems of the !and not becoming available in the 
time-frame in which the Users want it are identified when the User’s 
requirements are monitored by the Formation Commanders, involving the 
DEO in the field, the Director at the Command HOrs and the Director 
General at the Govt. level. Apart from the Users inter-acting with the 
Defence Estates Organisation, they also inter-act with the State Govt. at 
appropriate levels during the annual Civil Military Liaison Conferences and 
other specially organised meetings to watch the progress of their projects. 
Every case of land acquisition comes up for review apart from the 
quarterly reports which the 70205 are required to send, at the stages of 
preparing the budgets. 


Conclusions 


4.38 The committee note that the Central Government have delegated the 
powers of appropriate Government as envisaged under the Land Acquisition 
Act, 1894 to the State Governments through a notification issued in terms of 
Article 258 of the Constitution. It is apparent that with the introduction of 
diarchy envisaged under the Constitution of India and the distribution of 
powers between the Union and the States, acquisition of land by the Central 
Government on its own is not. a practical preposition. However, the 
Committee are aware of the difficulties which the Ministry of Defence have 
been facing in speedy land acquisition and the delay in payment of 
compensation to the land owners causing dissatisfaction among and owners. 
At times reversal of decisions by State Governments in granting no 
objection certificates have also resulted in considerable time and cost over- 
run in execution of projects of national importance. 


4.39 The Committee have examined at length some of the suggestions 
placed before it by the Ministry of Defence seeking to give the user 
Department ६.2. the Ministry of Defence a certain leverage in the processing 


78 


of land acquisition cases, so that they can safeguard their interests in the 
event of State Government upholding objections against the acquisition of 
land or saddling the Ministry with the quantum of compensation which may 
not be fair in their opinion and or they can do little to get reduced. 


The Ministry has stated that the litigation regarding compensation could 
be processed through the Defence Estate Organisation to obviate the 
processing of enhancement at the mercy/negiect/indulgence of State 
Government officials and that a decision whether any particular site should 
be acquired or not, or whether the Ministry should withdraw from the 

should also rest with the Ministry. The Committee find that the 
suggestions made by the Ministry of Defence do not have much practical 
value. Moreover, they also find that in the existing provisions of the Land 
Acquisition Act there ts sufficient scope for mutual consultation between the 
user Department and the Land Acquisition Authority i.e. the Revenue 
Administration in the State. In view of the same, the Committee do not see, 


any reasons for change in the present procedure. 
Recommendation 


4.40 The Committee, however, recommend that the Ministry of Defence 
should work out appropriate modalities for maintaining active liaison with 
the State Governments in order to ensure smooth and speedy acquisition of 
land for Defence purposes. न 

4.41 The Committee note that Punjab is the only State where 
Goverament have prescribed a PERT table for monitoring progress of land 
acquisition cases. The Committee feel that in order to ensure completion of 
land acquisition within the statutory time schedule of three years the 
Ministry of Defence ought to strive to see that the example of Punjab is 
followed by all other States. The Committee, therefore, desire that DGDE 
should monitor the land acquisition cases on the basis of a PERT table duly 
dovetailed with the corresponding PERT tables of the project for which land 
is being acquired. The Government should also take up the matter with the 
State Gevernménts for making monitoring through PERT technique 
mandatory in such cases. 


4.42 The Committee further stress the need for encouraging the State 
Governments to establish State and District level Standing Committees to 
examine land acquisition proposals, on the pattern of those constituted by 
the State Government of Punjab. 


4.43 To ensure compliance with the over-all time limit prescribed under 
the Land Acquisition Act, 1984, the Committee desire the Ministry of Rural 
Development to closely liaise with the State Governments and impress upon 
those Governments which have yet to specify time limits for 


719 


completion of various processes of land acquisition work as per the 
consensus arrived at in the Land Acquisition Conference held in July, 1989. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the owtcome as the result of the 
efforts made by the Ministry in this regard. 


2146LS-13 


CHAPTER—V 
LAND ACQUISITION AND CITIZENS 
Market Valve 


5.1 The Ministry of Defence have stated that as a concept, the market 
value is what a willing buyer will pay a willing seller in the same time- 
frame for lands of comparable advantages and disadvantages. As long as 
all the lands were only agricultural in nature and the registered sale deeds 
faithfully reflected the true value paid, there was not much to agitate on 
the quantum of compensation awarded in accordance with the provisions 
of the L.A. Act, 1894. However, the temptation to avoid/reduce tax, and 
conceal blackmoney payments in the transactions, became apparent from 
the low transfer value registrations, which appeared to increase on accourt 
of enhancement in: 


(i) Stamp duty 
(1) Registration Charge 
(i) Transfer of Property Tax 


aud the requirement to obtain a clearance from the Income Tax 
Authorities for registration of the sales. <. 


5.2 The above factors have made the basic sales data/statistics relied 
upon by the Government in deciding the compensation unreliable. 
Discreation, if granted, could be suspect, being capable of abuse. What 
can be extracted as compensation from the judicial form is reckoned as 
“equity”. As long as the obtaining social values prevail, and there is 
undervaluation of the sales transactions, there will be attempts to seek 
more compensation, if the amount is not a negotiated one. 


5.3 In view of the tendency for undervaluation of sales transactions, the 
Committee enquired from Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Rural 
Development, what formula would they suggest to arrive at the market 
value from the consideration reflected in the Sale Deeds, or other 
documents that could from the basis for estimating just compensation and 
whether alternative the Department would recommend any other method 
of arriving at a just and fair compensation for land being acquired. 
Expressing their views, the Department have stated: 


“Section 23(1) of the L.A. Act, 1894 provides for determination 
of the amount of compensation on the basis of market value on 
the date of the publication of the notification under Section 


8) 


81 


41). The Act does not prescribe any method for determining 
the market value of the land. It has been left to the State 
Governments to do so who in turn have laid down norms for its 
determination. The State Governments are aware of the 
problem regarding determination of market value of land and 
the safeguards have been provided to deal with it in many 
States. Besides, in addition to the market value of the land, as 
provided under Section 23(1) of the LA Act, 1894 and amount 
for damage, if any, through the amendment carried out in 1984, 
payment of solatium @ 30% of the market value of the land in 
consideration of the compulsory nature of acquisition and an 
additional amount @ 12% per annum of the market value for 
the period from the date of publication of notification under 
Section 4(1) to the date of award or the date of taking 
possession of the land, whichever is earlier, has also been 
authorised. In addition higher interest @ 9% p.a. for the first 
year and 15% p.a. for the period thereafter is also payable to 
the land losers under Section 28 and 34 of the Act for excess 
amount of compensation and delayed payments. All these 
provisions make the amount of compensation more realistic and 
just and thus protect the interest of the land losers. These 
provisions go a long way in meeting peoples’ grievances and 
reducing litigations. 


The Department of Rural Development is aware of the 
problem about the tendency to undervalue the land while 
registering sale-deeds. This matter was discussed in the Land 
Acquisition Conference held in July 1989. The Consensus on the 
subject reached therein was that while there is no need to 
change the provision of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, 
appropriate measures may be taken to ensure that, realistic 
market value of the land proposed to be acquired is taken into 
account for determination of compensation such as fixing a 
minimum valpe of land for specific areas and different classes of 
land from time to time for purpose of payment of stamp duty 
and or determination of other taxes. The State Governments 
have been advised accordingly. 


In respect of lands held by’ members of Scheduled Tribes 
reliable land transactions are generally not available and even 
where these are available these do not reflect the correct market 
value due to legal restrictions on transfer of tribal land to non- 
tribals. On the basis of the consensus arrived at in the 


82 


Conference, States have been advised to devise alternative 
methods for determination of market value of tribal lands such 
as capitalised value of the produce from the acquired/similar 
categories of 10 on the basis of its poetntial productivity. The 
Ministry of Welfare in their draft rehabilitation policy for 
displaced tribals have also suggested a minimum of Rs. 10,000 
per acre for determination of market value. 


The Department of Rural Development does not consider it 
necessary to amend the LA Act, 1894 for reducing litigation 
arising out of compensation award in respect ' of acquird 
lands. The provisions of the LA Act, 1894 as atnended in 1984 
for determining the amount of compensation are considered 
quite adequate to safeguard the interest of land losers and 
reduce the number of Court cases arising out of the 
compensation awarded.” 


y 


5.4. As regards the needs to have norms for determining the market value 
of the land, the Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Rural 
Development) stated during evidence: 


“The statute does not lay down any principle. This is left to the 
State Government to lay down the method of arriving at the 
value of the land. Even the Mulla Committee which was 
appointment in 70s did not make any such recommendation. 
They consider this specific question. They also came to the 
conclusion that ft was not desirable to lay down any statutory 
rules for this purpose. Similar conclusion was also drawn by the 
Law Commission in 1958. The State Government do lay down 
the principles to determine the value of the land. For instance, 
Orissa has clearly laid down the method of ascertaining the 
market value by finding out the sale price in the vicinity of that 
area.” 


5.5 In regard to ‘envelope rate’ devised by the Maharashtra Government 
for market value of the land, the Ministry of Defence informed the 
Committee: 


“The market value of the land for estimating the compensation 
is based on the registered sale deeds for the locality. The 
reliability and the relevance of these have come to be looked 
down sceptically due to the increasing operation of black 
money. Maharashtra Government had, in 1984, during the 
discussions with the Ministry of Defence, at the level of Defence 
Secretary and the Chief Secretary, held that they would adopt 
an ‘envelope rate’ which would be 212 times the land acquisition 
award rates for the compensation. At that time the legal 
entitlement as compensation was market value (M) +0.15 M (as 


83 


solatium) and an amount for shifting the family, say, a total 
compensation of 1.20 M. After the amendments introduced to 
the LA Act, in September, 1984, the legal entitlement is market 
value (M) + 0.30 M (solatium)+0.12 M for period upto 3 years 
as additional compensation, + disturbance allowance, say a 
compensation of 1.70 M. When compensation was 1.20 M. the 
Envelope rate’ was 2'/, x (1.20 M) = 3 M. Hence, on the same 
ration, the ‘envelope rate’ will be 2'/, (1.70 M) now, i.e. 4.25 
M.” 


5.6 About the Scheme of the Government of Maharashtra in devising an 
envelope rate’ 2'/, times of the market value, the Secretary, Department 
of Rural Development stated: 


“I contacted the Chief Secretary of Maharashtra. Maharashtra 
Government is itself having second thought and I tried to find 
out from them how they arrived at it. It is more or less on ad 
hoc system. They are not satisfied with the rate. That is why, 
we felt that when the Maharashtra Government had reservations 
and it does not eliminate the possibilities of further litigation, it 
may not be worth.” 


5.7 The Committtee asked the Department of Rural Development to 
apprise the Committee of the experience of the Government of Maharashtra 
in adopting the system of ‘envelope rates’ and how it had been successful in 
reducing the grievances and litigation for enhancement of compensation. 
They were also asked to indicate what were the views of the Department to 
the adoption of same formula for acquiring land for Central Government 
Departments. 


In this connection, the Ministry have intimated that the Government of 
Maharashtra was addressed in the matter who have informed that 
compensation at ‘envelope rates’ has so far been paid in respect of four 
projects. This envelope rate is inclusive of the amount of compensation 
payable under the provisions of the LA Act. 


5.8 The State Govt. has further stated that the payment of compensation 
amount at envelope rate has resulted in adverse effect and on the analogy of 
precedents given, everybody is now demanding the amount of compensation 
at envelope rates. The Demand having become universal, it has become 
impossible for the State Government to accede to such demands considering 
the limited provision in the Plan Allocation for payment of compensation. 
The State Govt., therefore, ultimately decided to review the entire ‘position 
and accordingly the State Cabinet in its meeting held on 28th October, 1986 
appointed a Committee of Secretaries headed by the Chief Secretary with a 
view to suggesting the State Governments about the procedure to be 
adopted while considering the demands of payment of compensation at 
envelope rates. The Committee has finalised its report very recently and 


84 


follow-up action in respect of the recommendations made by the Committee 
is under progress. ते 


By sanctioning the amount of compensation at envelope rate, there is no 
reduction in grievances and litigation for enchancement of the 
compensation. On the contrary, land owners are accepting the amount of 
compensation at envelope rate and at the same time they are approaching 
the Court of Laws for enhancement of compensation under Section 18 of the 
Land Acquisition Act. Thus, they are snatching the benefits under envelape 
rates as well as under the provisions of the LA Act. 


5.9 The Department of Rural Development does not agree to payment of 
compensation at ‘envelope rates’ as it is not in accordamce with law. 
Besides, it appears from the above that even the State Govt. is disinelined to 
continue the arrangement and has undertaken to review the system ia 
depth. 


Litigation for enhancement of compensation 


5.10 The Committee have been informed that there are 14,520 court 
cases involving 10,217 acres of land. 4967 number of cases involving 
6604 acres of land are more than five year old litigations. 


5.11 A large percentage of the cases under litigation relates to claims for 
enhancement of compensation. Such litigation, however, does not stand in 
the way of the possession of the land being taken aver. 


5.12 According to the Ministry of Defence the main teasons contributing 
to high rise in the number of court cases were as follows: 


(i) As long as litigation offers a chance to realjge even a small 
pecuniary gain, there will be court cases. 


(ii) The same set of data regarding sales of land, the lay of the land 
and the advantages of various plots of land can be perceived 
differently by different persons. There is no precise method of 
evaluating houses, trees, wells, walls etc. Thus, claims may be 
perceived differently and the interested persons evolve all manner 
of arguments. When the matter is before the Court/Arbitrator a 
perception different from that contained in the Award of the 
Collector can, and does, emerge. In many cases for reasons not 
always spelt out, the Court/Arbitrator enhances the compensation 
awarded by the Collector. When this takes place the issue is 
examined by the Defence Estates Organisation in consultation with 
the Ministry of Law. If, it is perceived that the enhancement is fair 
on the basis of the data relied upon, no appeal is filed by the 
Ministry of Defence. If it is perceived that the data had been 
misinterpreted to give unwarranted enhancement to the claimants, 
or the law on the compensation had been misinterpreted, a 
challenge is made. 


85 


(itt) The LA Act was amended. through a Bill introduced in Parilament 
in April 1982, which received the dssent of the President in 
September 1984. liberalising the scales of compensation 
substantially. But a parallel effort was not attempted in respett of 
the RAIP Act. The disparity in the rates of compensation (See 
Annexure) awarded increased and with that litigations too when 
the Punjab and Haryana High Court and the Arbitrators in Punjab 
awarded such additional elements in the compensation as solatium, 
interest and additional compensation as envisaged in the Land 
Acquisition Act. 


(iv) Certain Transitional provisions were introduced with the 
amendments made to the LA Act, 1894 in September, 1984 vide 
LA (Amendment) Act. 1984 (No. 68 of 1984). These are as 
below:— 


“Transitional Provision—(1) The provisions of sub-section (1-A) of 
section 23 of the principal Act. as inserted by clause (a) of section 
1S of this Act, shall apply. and shall be deemed to have applied, 
also to, and in relation to— 


(a) every proceeding for'the acquisition of any land under the 
principal Act pending on the 30th day of April, 1982 (the date 
of introduction of the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 
1982, in the House of the People). in which no award has been 
made by the Collector before that date. 


(b) every proceeding for the acquisition of any land under the Principal 
Act commenced after that date, whether or not an award has been 
made by the Collector before the commencement of this Act. 


(2) the provisions of sub-section (2) of Section 23 and Section 28 of the 
principal Act, as amended by clause (b) of Section 15 and Section 18 of 
this Act. respectively shall apply and shall be deemed to have applied also 
to: and in relation to any award made by the Collector or Court or to any 
order passed by the High Court or Supreme Court in appeal against any 
such award under their provisions of the principal Act. after 30th day of 
the Apri. 1982. (the date of introduction of the Land Acquisition 
(Amendment) Bill. 1982. in the House of the People) and before the 
commencement of this Act. 


(3) The provisions of Section 34 of the principal Act as amended by 
Section 20 of this Act, shall apply. and shall be deemed to have applied, 
also to, and in relation to:—- 
(a) every case in which possession of any land acquired under the 
principal Act had been taken betore the 30th day of April. 1982 
(the date of introduction of the Land Acquisition (Amendment) 
Bill, 1982. in the House of the People). and the amount of 
compensation for such acquisition had not been paid or 


86 


deposited under Section 31 of the principal Act until such 
date, with effect on and from that date; and 


(b) every case in which such possession had been taken on or after 
that date but before the commencement af this Act without 
the amount of compensation having been paid or deposited 
under the said section 31, with effect on afd ftom the date of 
taking such possession.” 


5.13 The transitional provisions (See Annexure) included ॥ the 
amendments introduced to the LA Act. 1894, in September 1984 gave 
retrospective effect to certain elements of compensation and on the rates 
of interest. The preceptions of the Legislature, the Executive, the Judiciary 
and the dispossessed were not congruent on the cases covered by this. This 
was the dam-burster setting in motion a large number of litigations. Some 
‘Courts came to reopen long settled cases, awarding higher solatium (at 
30%), additional element of compensation and high interest. Where cases 
had remained in the cold storage of the courts, interest at 15% p.a. came 
to be awarded for many years, for whatever enhancement the courts could 
be pursuaded to grant. The Arbitrators and the High Court in Punjab 
started drawing an extra legislated parallel and power in RAIP Act cases. 
This gave rise to more court cases. 


However. it may be noted that 9553 out of the 14,520 cases, that is 
nearly 66% are less than 5 years old. after filling. Most of these are a fall 
out from the transitional provision of the LA Act. 1894 which came in 
force in September 1984. “.. 


5.14 The Ministry further stated that these litigations, emanating with 
the amendments made to the LA Act, can not be reduced by another set 
of amendments. Such measures can only set in motion another wave of 
litagations. Only when the Supreme Court pronounces finally on the scope 
of the transitional provisions, the tide will recede. 


ANNEXURE 


(See paras 5.12 & 5.13 of the report) 


Variations in provisions of Land Acquisition Act, 1894 ad Requisitioning 
and Acquisition of Immovakle. Property Act, 1952. 


Compensation under the ‘Lend Acquisition Act, 1894, 


1. The major elements of conrpensation for acquisition of land under the 
Land Acquisition Act, before 1984 Amendment have been: 


(i) The cstimated market value of the land (including buildings, trees 
and crops) on the date on which a preliminary notification u/s 4(1) 
of the Act was published. 


(1) In addition amount at 15% of such market value as solatium. 


(iii) 6% per annum of the amount of compensation, as interest, if the 
compensation, had not been paid or deposited in the court on or 
before taking possession of the land, till it shall have been paid or 
deposited. 

2. The elements of compensation payable enhanced with the cominginto 


गिर of the LA (Amendment) Act 1984, with effect from 24th September, 
1984 are as follows: 


(i) Additional compensation at the rate of 12% per annum on the 
market value of the land for the period from the date of publication 
of the notification under Section 4 of the LA Act to the date of 
award of the Collector or the date of taking over possession of the 
land. whichever is earlier. 


(1) Higher solatium at 30% of the market value of the land. 


(iii) Higher interest at 9% P.A. for the first year of delay in disbursing 
the compensation and 15% p.a. thereafter 


(iv) 6% per annum as interest on the amount of compensation awarded 
by the Court in excess of that awarded by the Collector from the 
date of taking possession of the land till the date of payment-of such 
exccss compensation into Court. 


(v) Higher interest at 9% per annum for the first year and 15%. per 
annum for the period thereafter on the amount of compensation 
awarded by the Court in excess of that awarded by the Collector 
from the date of taking possession of the land till the date of 
payment of such excess compensation ito Court. 


87 
2146LS-14 


88 


Compensation Under Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable 
Property Act, 1952. 


The compensation payable under the RAIP Act, 1952 is the price which 
the requisitioned property would have fetched in the open market if it had 
remained in the same condition as it was at the time of requisitioning and 
sold on the date of acquisition. 


3.15 Asked why the Ministry of Defence had chosen to challenge all 
enhancements of compensation in various courts as of routine and whether 
there was any policy governing this aspect of preferring appeals in higher 
courts for land compensation awards, the Ministry stated as follows: 


“It 1s not correct to hold that the Ministry of Defence routinely 
challenges all enhancements of compensation by various Courts. In 
land acquisition cases, the compansation is initially fixed and 
awarded by the Collector in consultation with or with the prior 
approval of the appropriate Govt. While doing this, the claims 
preferred by the interested persons, the perceptions of the 
Collector and of the officers at various levels are considered by the 
Govt. before the draft Award is cleared. The Act itself provides 
that in a land reference under Section 18, the compensation to be 
given by the Court shall not be less than what is contained in the 
Award of the Collector. Section 25 of the Act refers. Thus, in the 
first instance, it is not the Govt. that is challenging the quantum of 
the compensation awarded. It is the land owners and the occupants 
who first challenge the compensation awarded. This takes place 
before the Court through references under Section 18 of the LA 
Act, in the case of acquisition by recourse to LA Act, and before 
an Arbitrator appointed by the State Govt. in the case of 
acquisition ‘by recourse to RAIP Act if the owner of the land and 
the Govt. had not been able to agree on the exact quantum of 
compensation. 


The policy regulating the filing of appeals to the higher courts is 
that the compensation awarded should be within the framework of 
the law by recourse to which the acquisition was made and that 
there should be no extension, through judicial forum, what is not 
provided in the law. In many cases the appeals to the higher 
forums are taken by the landowners and the Govt. is only a 
defendent. All appeals are filed only after procuring the advice of 
the Ministry of Law.” 


5.16 Explaining the position further the Secretary. Ministry of Defence 
stated during evidence: 


‘We ourselves tried to bring out what seems to be the inequality 
of the principles of natural justice and what we have learnt from 
the use of these lands. The Law Commission had gone into some 


89 


of these matters in the past in fair detail in the Seventies. I would 
suggest that based on the final view of the Committee in the 
matter the recommendation could be addressed to the nodal 
Ministry. We would on our part abide by whatever be the final 
view and create as few problems as possible. But the fact remains 
that Parliament has enacted those laws at given points of time, on 
the basis of obtaining circumstances different, and brought the law 
up to date. Some High Courts are taking by and large, a different 
view on the provisions of these Acts, as we have mentioned 
elsewhere. The Hon. Punjab and Haryana High Court had 
virtually decided not to take note of the specific provisions of the 
RAIP Act. These decisions have been by and large based on the 
principles engrained in the Land Acquisition Act. As_ the 
concerned department we have to judge, when the decision is not 
on par legally. We have no choice. If we sit back we will be held 
guilty of having accepted them, as mentioned before this 
Committee and if this Committee wishes to make some 
recommendations to the nodal Ministry, we will welcome 1." 


5.17 The Committee referred to the observation of the Punjab and 
Haryana Court awarding solatium and interest as available in the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894, in case of acquisition of requisitioned Property 
under the RAIP Act, 1952 (AIR 1983 P & H 277) that: 


‘The basic reason or justification for the grant of solatium at the 
rate of 15 percent of the market value interms of the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894, is the compulsory nature of acquisition of 
the property of a land owner. A land owner is equally helpless in 
matters of acquisition of requisitioned property under the RAIP 
Act, 1952." 


5.18 The Committee besides seeking the comments of the Ministry of 
Urban Development enquired from them whether objectives of the 
principles Laid down in the Land Acquisition Act for awarding solatium 
and interest on compensation can be achieved through amendments to the 
RAIP Act only. The Ministry, in note, stated:— 


“The acquisition of the requisitioned property under the provisions 
of RAIP Act, 1952 is intended to be made in exceptional 
circumstances, as distinct from the acquisition under the Land 
Acquisition Act. The nature of compulsory acquisition for which 
solatium is payable under the Land Acquisition Act, is also 
different in the two Acts as follows:— 


(i) Under the Land Acquisition Act the property is in possession 
of the landlord and he is compulsorily deprived of the same. The 
question of any acquiescence on his part or ascertaining his option 
is not involved at all. 


(ii) But in the case of RAIP Act the property is already in 


90 


possession of the Government for a fairly long period and the 
Landlord is not deprived of the actual possession at the time of 
acquisition. Moreover, of the two circumstances under which the 
requisitioned property can be acquired in the RAIP Act, 1952, in 
one case it is entirely optional for landlord to allow the property to 
be acquired or accept the same in the manner in which it can be 
restored to him. It is only in the other case in which a 
requisitioned property is acquired for securing and preserving the 
work carried out during the requisition of the property for the 
purpose of the Govt. that element of compulsory acquisition is 
there. However, this is also to be weighed against the fact that the 
possession of this property must have been with the Government 
for a quite long period. 


Since the payment of compensation for acquisition of 
requisitioned property is made on the date of acquisition and not 
from an earlier period of issue of a preliminary notification under 
Section—4(1) as in the case of Land Acquisition Act, the landlord 
gets the benefit of increase of mafket price in property which has 
been going up usually at much higher rates than the element of 
interest or solatium. 


Accordingly, there does not seem to be any need to amend the 
RAIP Act, 1952. Nevertheless, it can be left to the option of the 
landlord to seek compensation under the provisions of RAIP Act 
or under the provisions of Land Acquisition Act but in the latter 
case he shall have to agree to property remaining under requisition 
for another three years while the compensation is determined from 
the date on which the decision to acquire the property is 
communicated to him. From that date onwards he shall not be 
paid the recurring compensation but interest at the rate of 12% 
and solatium @30% as laid down in the LA Act.” 


5.19 In this context, the Ministry of Defence stated: 


“There is no option left to the landlord to seek compensation 
either under the provisions of RAIP Act or under the provisions of 
LA Act in respect of lands requisitioned under the RAIP Act. 
Acquisition by recourse to the RAIP Act arises only in respect of 
properties which have already been tequisitioned and where 
conditions stipulated in Section 7(3) of the Act are satisfied. The 
compensation on acquisition is as provided in Section 8 of the Act. 
There is no discretion given therein to the landlord to seek 
compensation as in LA Act. It is precisely because of this reason 
that many persons had agitated the matter before the High Courts 
and the Punjab and Haryana High Court gave a judgement for 
compensation as contemplated in the LA Act, even though the 
acquisition had been under the RAIP Act. A property which has 


91 


been requisitioned under the RAIP Act can, however, be acquired 
by recourse to the LA Act, ignoring the effect of requisition and 
the liabilities attached to the requisition. When it is so acquired 
under the LA Act, the compensation as applicable under the LA 
Act would be payable. But, the discretion for this is not available 
to the landlord. Only where the conditions contained in Section 7(3) 
of the RAIP Act ‘are not satisfied, the option is to acquire 
land under the LA Act. The large number of challenges in, the 
Supreme Court as SLPs on the adjudication of compensation 
granted by the Punjab and Haryana High Court and the 
Arbitrators in Punjab, in respect of RAIP Act cases, as in the LA 
Act, were made on the specific advice of the Ministry of Law 
(Legal Adviser, Solicitor General or an Additional Solicitor 
General).”’ 


5.20 On being pointed out by the Committee whether, in the opinion of 
Ministry of Urban Development, the applicability of two different Acts 
had resulted in excessive litigation involving Govt. Departments, the 
Ministry in a note stated: 


“The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and the Requisition and 
Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952 are intended to 
tackle different situations. while the Land Acquisition Act 1894 
makes provision for ab-initio acquisition of property for a public 
purpose, not necessarily being a purpose of the Union, the 
Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952 is 
not intended to acquire properties as such. It is really meant for 
requisitioning a property for a public purpose, being a purpose of 
the Union for a limited period upto 17 years. It is only in the 
exceptional circumstances where any additions and alterations 
made in the requisitioned property cannot be undone to the 
satisfaction of the Landlord or otherwise required to be preserved, 
provision has been made for acquisition of the requisitioned 
property under Section-7 of the Requisitioning and Acquisition of 
Immovable Property Act, 1952 in the following circumstances. 


(i) Where any works have during the period of requisition been 
constructed on, in or over, the property wholly or partially at the 
expense of the Central government and the Government decide 
that the value of, or the right to use, such works should be secured 
or preserved for the purpose of Government or 


(ii) Where the cost of restoring the property to its conditions at the 
time of its requisition would in the determination of the Central 
Government, be excessive and the owner declines to accept release 
from requisition of the property without payment of compensation 
for so restoring the Property. 


Accordingly there is functional necessity for operating these two 


92 


Acts separately. Ministry of Urban Development is not aware 
whether there has been any excessive Litigation because of the 
operation of two different Acts.” 


5.21 In regard to role of the nodal Ministry, when other Ministries come 
across difficulties in the operation of the Act, the Additional Secretary, 
Ministry of Urban Development, stated: 


‘As regards the operation of the RAIP Act, though we are the 
nodal Ministry, the authority has been delegated to the various 
Ministries, etc. Where the authority has been delegated, we really 
do not monitor what is happening.” 


5.22 In response to query on requisitioning of building for office 
purposes, the representative added: 


“Its operation has been decentralised. It is not operated by our 
Ministry. In 1985, an amendment was proposed to the Cabinet that 
the prior approval of our Ministry may be taken. But that was not 
approved by the Cabinet. As a reault it is being operated 
independently by various Ministries.” 


5.23 The Committee enquired whether Ministry of Urban Development 
did not think the principles governing the compensation in all matters of 
deprevation of property should be the same in all legislations. To this, the 
Ministry in their note stated: 


“It is considered that the payment of compensation for acquisition 
of the property under RAIP Act, is rather edvantageous compared 
to that provided under the Land Acquisition Act. In the latter Act, 
1.6. Land Acquisition Act compensation 1s determined at the 
market rate prevailing at the time of issue of initial notification 
under Section 4(1) whereas the final award for acquisition may be 
given upto three years from that date. On the other hand, under 
the RAIP Act, the compensation is determined on the actual date 
of acquisition with reference to condition of the building as it was 
at the time of requisition. Reasons for determining the price with 
reference to the said state of the building at the ‘time of 
requisitioning, obviously, is that the landlord is not required to 
carry out any addition or alternations after requisition which are 
carried out, if at all by the Government. 


As regards solatium the position has been explained in detail 
seprately. So far as interest is concerned obviously the landlord ts 
at no disadvantage, compared to the Land Acquisition Act since 
he had been getting recurring compensation (rent) while the 
building was under acquisition and gets market price as on the date 
of -acquisition.’’ 


5.24 Clariflying the position in regrd to an observation made in their 
note that “the payment of compensation for acquisition of the property 


93 


under RAIP Act is rather advantage as compared to that provided under 
the Land Acquisition Act,” the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Urban 
Development submitted during evidence: 


‘‘When we have made this statement, it is essentially with 
reference to the urban areas and whatever we submit is with 
reference to the urban areas only. It may not be applicable to the 
same extent in rural areas.” 


5.25 The Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) 
who were requested to advise the legal position in this regard and the 
justification for going in appeal to the Supreme Court in such cases by the 
Ministry of Defence, have stated that: 


‘the tenor of the judgements of various courts has been that there 
is no justification for discriminating between an acquisition under 
the RAIP Act from the one under the Land Acquisition Act.” 


5.26 With regard to the legal position of payment of solatium and 
interest in the matters of acquisition of requisitioned land undér the RAIP 
Act, 1952, the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) 
have stated as follows:— 


“Section 8 of the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable 
Property Act, 1952, lays down principles and method of 
determining compensation where any property is requisitioned or 
acquired under the Act. Sub-section (1) lays down the principles 
for determining the compensation. If parties do not reach 
agreement with regard to the amount of compensation, the Central 
Government is required to appoint an arbitrator. Under sub- 
section (1)(e) the arbitrator is required to make an award 
determining the amount of compensation which appears to him to 
be just, and, in making the award, he shall have regard to the 
circumstances of each case and the provisions of sub-sections (2) 
and (3), so far as they are applicable. 
(2) Further, under sub-section (3), the compensation payable is 
the open market price of the property on the date of acquisition. 
(3) In short, the arbitrator is required to give just compensation, 
having regard to, among other things, the provisions of sub-section 
(3) and the circumstances of each case. The arbitrator may also 
award solatium.” 
Negotiated Award 
5.27 Section 11(2) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 as amended in 
1984, provides as follows: 
“Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-Section (1) if at any 


stage of the proceedings, the Collector is saftisfied that all the 
persons interested in the land who appeared before him have 


94 


agreed in writing on the maters to be included in the award of the 
Collector in the form prescribed by rules made by the appropriate 
Government he may without making further enquiry make an 
award according to the terms of such agreement. The 
determination of compensation for any land under Sub-section (2) 
shall not in any way affect the determination of compensation in 
respect of other lands in the same locality, or elsewhere in 
accordance with other provisions of this Act.” 


5.28 It was envisaged under these provisions the State Govts. would not 
give awards without clearance from the Central Govt. and that a 
negotiated compensation could be given to the dispossessed persons 
avoiding all litigations and consequent extra expenditure and delay for the 
dispossessed persons as well as the Govt. However, the potential to enter 
into a negotiated award, as authorised in Sub-section (2), has not been 
exploited. Even though the law gave the opportunity and the power to the 
Central Govt. to control the award, in practice the entire power of the 
Central Govt. (except the power to make rules and to take decisions on 
acquisition) has been entrusted to the State Govt. by the Presidential 
Order under Article 258 of the Coristitution. However, some State Govt. 
take the clearance of the Central Govt. to the draft award. Others do not 
take such clearance and act as they like. 


5.29 Asked to explain why powers to “enter into a negatiated award” 
had not been ‘fully exploited’? and what remedial measures could be 
initiated to ensure a more uniform compliance by States, the Ministry of 
Defence in their reply stated :— 


“The State Govts. have not encouraged the Collectors to enter 
into negotiated awards perhaps because of the inherent potential of 
subjective approach being followed by individual Collectors.” 


5.30 In this context, the Ministry in a separate note suggested: 


“The State Govt. and the Collector concerned should be intimated, at 
the outset, that, if possible, the Central Government would like an 
award by agreement to be caused and made as contemplated in Sec. 
11(2) of the Act and to explore this a Committee comprising the 
representatives of the Ministry of Defence, the Deptt. of 
Defence(Fin), the DGDE, the Users and the Land Acquisition 
Collector concerned should be constituted and that this Committee 
should hold negotiations once the claims for compensations are 
received from the interested persons on the issuance of the notices 
contemplated in sub-sections(1), (2) & (3) of section 9 of the Act.” 


5.31 The Committee desired to know whether in the existing procedure, 
the system of negotiated award could be introduced to cut down time 


95 


factor and reduce harassment to the land losers. The Secretary, Ministry of 
Defence, during evidence stated: 


“They are legally permissible with the approval of Collector. We 
would have to formally discuss with the State Government concerned, 
before we take up and try to model our plan on the basis of 
negotiated awards but I am not very sure even if we in the Ministry ‘ 
of Defence are keen to follow it as a major policy change, even if the: 
State Government are inclined to agree with us.....It has to be the 
Collector’s own agreement to ensure a timely award subject to the 
control of the State Revenue Department hierarchy. Our own 
experience shows that in some cases the States are not inclined to 
give the power of negotiated awards to the individual Collectors. This 
is apparently for maintaining a broad based uniform approach to the 
basis on which awards are evolved. What I wish to submit is that we 
will definitely try it out in our future efforts for acquisition, take up a 
particular State and have a discussion with them at senior level in 
order to see how it can work out to the best advantage of the State 
Governments, ourselves and the people who are going to be 
displaced from the land.” 


Disbursement of Compensation 


5.32 The compensation due for the land acquisition is not disbursed 
jointly by the Collector and the Defence Estates Organisation. The 
disbursement is done by the Land Acquisition Collector. Till 1983, except 
Assam, all the State Governments used to incur the expenditure directly as 
per their Award and raise debits to the Ministry of Defence. However, 
from 01.01.83, when compensation becomes due, the required amount is 
deposited by the Defence Estates Officer with the Collector. The Land 
Acquisition Officers are required to render accounts of the payments to 
the Defence Estates Officer as per policy instructions issued from time to 
time. Whenever any complaint is received the matter is taken up with the 
cencerned State Government. 


5.33 On being asked what had been the general nature of complaints 
about disbursements and how these were taken up with State Governments 
and settled, the Ministry of Defence in their reply explanined as follows: 


“(1) The amount of compensation awarded by the Collector is not 
adequate/full. This may be because the claimant had staked a 
claim higher than that recommended; that he had not received 
the full claim as per ward; that what had actually been disbursed 
was not what was recorded or what was due under the Award; 
that the valuations of trees, wells, walls, huts etc. were not done 
correctly; the amount had been disbursed to wrong persons (this 
may be due to misunderstanding, or dispute, about title); that the 
rate applicable the classification of the land has not been correct 
efc. 


2146LS-15 


96 


(2) That non-entitled persons were given compehsation or that funds 
had been misappropriated. 


Complaints received are sent to the Defence Estates Officers to ascertain 
the facts from the Land Acuisition Collector. If there has been aberration 
on thépart of the Collector, the State Government and the Collector are 
requestéd to take remedial measures. If the complaint arises from a 
misunderstanding, or misrepresentation of facts, it is dealt with in the 
perspective.” 

5.34 The Committee pointed out that there was considerable delay in 
the actual disbursement of the compensation even after the quantum of 
money required to be disbursed as compensation deposited by the 
Acquiring Department with the Collector/State Government and therefore 
sought the comments of Department of Rural Development on the 
Suggestion that Acquiring Department ought to be made directly 
responsible for disbursement of compensation to the persons entitled and 
that alternatively or additionally, there ought to be an enabling provision 
in the L. Act for the purpose. In reply, the Ministry of Rural Development 
have stated: 


“The land acquisition proceedings under the Land Acquisition Act, 
1984 are conducted by the Collector, as defined in Section 3(c), 
which means the Collector of a district and includes a Deputy 
Commissioner and any officer specially appointed by the 
‘appropriate Government’ to perform the functions of a Collector 
under the Act. Therefore, it is the Collector who under section 31 
is empowered to make payment of compensation to the entitled 
persons according to the award made by him. Normally, payment 
of compensation is made on making an award under Section 11. 
However, in some cases delay may take place in dishursement of 
compensation which may be on account of, among others, one or 
more of the following reasons: 


(a) Dispute regarding the identity of persons to be paid 
compensation. 


(b) Insistence on succession certificate when the recorded land 
holder has died. 


(c) Dispute regarding apportionment of compensation between 
parties. 


(d) Absence of the beneficiary. 


(९) Non-receipt of compensation amount from the Requisitioning 
Department/Agency particularly the additional or enhanced 
amount of compensation awarded by the reference Court. 


(f) Lack of updated land records. 
(g) Complaints regarding inadequate compensation, procedural 


97 
lapses in its calculation etc. 


Some of the above points are required to be settled by following 
prescribed procedure which takes time. The requisitioning 
Department would virtually have no role to play in settling these 
issues. Therefore, it is only the Collector and the land acquisition/ 
revenue staff who sort out these matters because they are in touch 
with land holders by virtue of their key position जा district 
administration. Therefore, it is neither desirable nor necessary to 
involve the Requisitioning agencies in the matters of payment/ 
disbursement of compensation directly or indirectly. In any case, the 
Requisitioning agency do normally keep in touch with the land 
acquisition authorities regarding the progress of acquisition 
proceedings including disbursement of compensation so_ that 
possession over the acquired land can be obtained speedily. 


Many State Govts. have preseribed time limits for completing 
various stages of acquisition preceedings and the Collector 1s required 
to adhere to this time-frame. Therefore, there is now much less 
possibility of undue delay taking place in disbursement of 
compensation to the interested persons.” 


5.35 The Department of Rural Development further stated that in July, 
1989 they had organised a Land Acquisition Conference to discuss 
problems relating to the implementation of the Land Acquisition Act, 1984 
as amended in 1984. In this Conference besides the Revenue Secretaries 
and Directors of J.and Acquisition of the State Governments/UT 
Administrations, representatives of Central Ministries/Departments 
including the Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence) had also 
participated. The representative of the Ministry of Defence who attended 
the meeting did not raise any such issue. However, on the basis of the 
consensus arrived at in the Conference, States have been advised to take 
the following steps in this regard: 


(a) Clear instructions may be issued about the manner in which the 
identity of persons shall be ascertained. These instructions may 
provide for local enquiry by a responsible officer rather than any 
legal process being prescribed for establishing such identity. 


(b) States may prescribe alternative procedure (except in very 
complicated cases) for establishing successors-in-interest rather 
than prescribing that a succession certificate may be obtained from 
a Court of law. Poor land losers do not have the resources to file 
a Court case for obtaining succession certificate. In many cases, 
there are also no disputes about the succession in the family. 
Therefore, purely a legalistic method fordetermining successors 
in-interest through judicial process be avoided wherever possible. 


(c) Disputes regarding apportionment of compensation should be 


98 


sorted out on the basis of legal advice and.through local enquiry in 
the village. Suggesting Court proceedings for resolving this dispuite 
should not be resorted to in a routine manner. 


(d) Usually, the district administration announces the date and time 
for disbursement of compensation and thereafter no efforts are 
made to locate the party who could not be present on the 
appointed date and time, it should be the responsibility of the 
Collector to locate the party rather than leaving it to the party to 
contact the Land Acquisition Officer for payment of 
compensation. 


(९) No land acquisition procedings should be initiated unless the 
approximate amount of compensation involved in it is first 
deposited. Further, as soon as the verdict of the court is available, 
the requisitioning agency may be directed to deposit the amount 
of additional compensation and also intimate about the liability to 
pay interest on- this amount in case of delay in payment. 


(f) As soon as declaration under Section 6(2) is issued, the Collector 
should take steps for updating of land records in respect of land 
involved in acquisition proceedings. 


In view of the above, amendment to the Act on the lines suggested 
by the Ministry of Defence is not necessary.” 


5.36 Explaining the position on the question of disbursement of 
compensation to land owners directly by the Acquiring Department and 
the enabling provision in the LA Act for the purpose, the Secretary, 
Ministry of Defence, during evidence stated: 


“I foresee some problems in this regard. Now, there are other large 
consumers of land and various Central Government authorities which 
also undertake extensive and continued acquisition of land, as in the 
case of Defence. In the scheme of land acquisition, the Collector is 
the nodal authority and is legally responsible for the assessment of 
the compensation, preparation of the award, finalisation and approval 
of the Award, payment and disbursement of compensation to the 
legal owners or to the eligible beneficiaries. While I see the concern 
of the Committee that there are long and unhappy delays in the 
actual disbursements, these relate to a variety of reasons varying from 
State to State and even within the State from Collector to Collector; 
how prompt and sensitive he is to the people’ requirement. We shall 
definitely examine this matter further and see what best can be done 
and if no difficulty arises we would definitely try to take on this 
responsibility of direct disbursement but I think the real answer lies 
in the Collectors performing his duties rather than our substituting 
theit legal role. Nevertheless, I submit that we will give it a very 
serious and prompt examination and see what best can be done. 


Prima facie I submit that there could be an additional legal 


99 


provision under the scheme of the Act itself, just as time frames have 
been stipulated for various activities and if that does not happen 
there is provision for the payment of penal interest rates and so on. 
Once the money is deposited and if theré are no contested claims, 
should the payment remain hanging for one to two years till all other 
claims are settled. 


5.37 The Secretary, Ministry of Defence further stated: 


“I agree with the Committee that people are very unhappy expecially 
in the Northern States where that land is cultivable and valuable. We 
take away the land through legal process. We will definitely look into 
the entire matter and see what best can be done. 


5.38 During their on-the-spot study visit of the Sub-Committee of the 
Estimates Committee to Jodhpur and Jaisalmer during January, 1991, 
some land losers in villages in Jaisalmer District submitted representations 
to the Sub-Committee and pointed out certain hardships being faced by 
them in the matter of non-payment of compensation for the lands acquired 
by the Defence Authorities and cases of pending payment for land 
acquired in Jaisalmer District by DEO, Rajasthan. 


5.39 In regard to certain pockets of lands measuring about 1150 acres 
dispersed in 10,000 acres of land under occupation of the Army 
authorities, it was submitted before the Sub-Committee that villagers were 
not allowed to graze their cattles and till their land. The villagers also 
demanded Village Community Facilities in their re-settlement scheme in 
lieu of acquisition of their villages/land. The DEO, Rajasthan, however, 
explained that they had not taken over the possession of the land. They 
will take over the possession of the land after paying compensation to the 
land owners. 


5.40 In this connection, the Collector of Jaisalmer submitted that the 
acquiring authorities (DEO) was very eager for acquiring of land but they 
were not prompt in making payment to the Collector for disbursement to 
the land owners. 


Practice of Government of Rajasthan for Retaining Share of 
Acquisition Award 


5.41 In regard to the practice followed by State Government of 
Rajasthan in appropriating to itself a major portian of the amount of 
compensation payable to the land owners on acquisition of his land DGDE 
informed the Committee as follow: 


‘In Rajasthan the question of apportionment of the compensation 
has arisen. Suppose, there is a compensation of Rs 1000. When the 
amount is to be disbursed, the State Government says that the 
individual should be given say Rs. 300 and the balance Rs 700 goes 
to the State.” 


100 
5.42 The Secretary, Ministry of Defence, added: 


“The Rajasthan Government has taken the view on more than one 
occasion that all land vests in the State. On this basis they wish to 
retain a share of the award.” 


5.43 Following specific instances were brought to the notice of the 
Committee during evidence as well in the material furnished in connection 
with study visit of Sub-Committee to Jodhpur and Jaiselmer during 
January, 1991: 


(i) In land acquisition in Jodhpur for 43 WEU, the Collector declared 
the award at the rate of Rs. 600/-per acre, pegging down the rate to the 
date of declaration. The State Government of Rajasthan charged the 
Ministry of Defence compensation @Rs.17/- per Sq. Yard i.e. Rs. 82,280/- 
per acre against the rate of Rs. 600/- per acre awarded and disbursed to 
the erstwhile land owners (Khatedars). It was less than one per cent of the 
compensation amount 


In accordance with the pricing policy agreed to between the Ministry of 
Defence and the State Government of Rajasthan, as contained in Ministry 
of Defence letter No. 2(2)/78/D(Qtg)D/Lands, Vol IV, dated 23 
September, 1980 Ministry of Defence issued revised sanction in March, 
1980 for pavment of Rs. 33,04,364.00 since the land was within the 
-Municipal limits. The enormous difference between the amount charged by 
the State Government and the amount disbursed to the land owners had 
been credited to the Revenue of the State Government. ~ 


(ii) In another case of land acquisition at Jodhpur for Army Unit at 
Shikargarh the land losers got only approx 13.7% of the rate of the award 
declared in September, 1984. The difference between the amount charged 
by the State Government and awarded amount disbursed to the land 
owners has been credited to the funds of the State Government. 


5.44 The Ministry of Rural Development furnished information as 
received by them from the Government of Rajasthan vide their letter 
No. 4/5/Revenue/Group-3/91 dated the 4th March 1991, stating as 
follows: 


‘As per Section 7 of Rajasthan Cultivation Act, and Rajasthan 
Land Revenue Act, ownership of all the agricultural land vests in the 
Government of Rajasthan. This land is available to the farmers for 
agriculture on payment of land revenue. Both these Acts prohibit the 
farmers from using this land for non-agricultural purposes, and they 
don’t have any ownership rights on this land. Section 90A of 
Rajasthan Land Revenue Act and the rules framed thereunder 
provide that cultivators can use the agricultural land for non- 
agricultural purposes only after depositing transfer fee as payable 
under these rules also after getting approval of the State 
Government. 


101 


Thus only agricultural land is acquired from the farmers for which 
compensation for agriculture land only is admissible to them. Even if 
a farmer sells that agriculture land, he gets the price of agriculture 
land only. It is ensured that, the farmers are paid compensation for 
the agriculture land by the Land Acquiring Officer as per the 
prevalent market rates as determined under Land Acquisition. Even 
after acquisition, such land can be used for non-agricultural purposes 
only after it is converted into non-agriculture land and the State 
Government; who is the owner of this land, is entitled to get 
conversion payment of a price at the rates prevalent on the 
residential land. Such land is acquired by the Ministry of Defence for 
non-agricultural purposes. The necessary instructions in this 
connection were issued by the Ministry of Defence, Government of 
India through the circular dated 23.9.80 as per the agreement 
between the State Government and the Central Government after 
necessary deliberations on every pros and cons of the matter; and 
accordingly the price of the land is paid by the Ministry of Defence to 
State Government. From this amount due compensation is paid to 
the farmers for their agricultural land. The compensation given to the 
farmer is never less than the market value of their agricultural land. 


Thus in the above mentioned cases the payment by the Ministry of 
Defence to the State Government has been made as per the 
agreement under, and out of this amount necessary compensation has 
been paid to the farmers for their agricultural land as determined by 
Land Acquisition Officer which is the right course of action.”’ 


Conclusions 


5.45 The Committee note that in a large number of land acquisition cases, 
land owners have been approaching courts of law for enhancement of the 
compensation awarded to them by the Land Acquisition Authorities. This, 
obviously, has resulted in protracted and costly litigation by the 
Government as also the land owners. In this context the Committee note 
that the underlying principal for determination of the compensation to be 
awarded should be to enable the owner of the land to be able to get 
possession of the similar land to rehabilitate himself without undue loss. 
They also note that the Mullah Committee which examined this aspect had 
recommended that the potential value of land being acquired should be the 
relevant consideration for determining the market value on the basis of 
which compensation is required to be awarded under the law. 


5.46 The Committee find that for various reasons there is a general 
tendency among the land owners to mention in their respective sale deeds a 
lesser price than actually received with the primary objective of effecting 
savings on registration fee and stamp duty. Consequently the basic sales 
data on which the Land Acquisition Authorities rely in 


102 


determining the market value for awarding compensation to land owners, is 
often incorrect. Open transactions in land which are not many thus do not 
reflect the true market value of the land or even its potential. Under the 
circumstances, the Committee are not surprised to find that land owners 
consider compensation being awarded to them for acquiring land to be 
unfair. 


5.47 The Committee also find that the concept of ‘envelope rates’ 
introduced in the State of Maharashtra has not been very successful in 
keeping land owners from entering into litigation with Government over the 
adequacy of the compensation. 


Recommendation 


The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry of Rural Development to 
examine the various principles adopted by the State Governments for 
fixation of market value of the land to determine how far these have given 
rise to prolonged and costly litigations for enhancement in compensation 
awarded by Land Acquisition authorities. The Committee also call upon the 
Ministry to suggest ways of removing the existing deficiencies both in the 
law and procedure, in the interest of the land losers and the State. While 
examining the matter, the Committee would like the Government to keep in 
mind the fact that land for the owner is not only an asset but also a mean of 
livelihood and when he is deprived of the same, he should be suitably 
compensated. The Committee would like to be apprised of outcome of such 
an exercise. 


Conclusions 


5.48 The Committee note that there were a total of 14520 court cases 
pending in regard to requisition/acquisition of property, including land, by 
the Ministry of Defence. They further note that disputes relating to 
acquisition/requisition of property invariably relate to the compensation 
payable to the affected party. The Committee find that one of the main 
issues which has given rise to litigation relates to the different provisions 
existing in the two status governing acquisition/requisition of property in 
regard to element of compensation. While Land Acquisition Act, 1894 
provides inter alia for payment of solatium and interest, there is no such 
provision under the RAIP Act in regard to requisitioned properties acquired 
thereunder. The Committee note that through an amendment in the Land 
Acquisition Act made in 1984, the rates of both solatium and interest have 
been raised substantially. Consequently, the compensation payable 
thereunder has become more remunerative for the owners of the property in 
comparison to what is admissible under RAIP Act. Consequently the 
affected parties have approached courts of law wherein they have contended 
that as acquisition of property under both the statutes involves an element 


103 


of compulsion, solatium, which is given to compensate the owner of the property 
against loss of ownership under compulsion, ought to be admissible also in the 
case of requisitioned properties acquired under the RAIP Act. The Courts and 
particularly the Punjab and Haryana High Court have upheld this view and 
have been awarding enhanced compensation taking into account the element 
of solatiury which they would have received if their properties had been 
acquired under Land Acquisition Act. In this context, the Committee 
examined the question why the provision of two statutes in regard to 
element of compensation cannot be brought at par and the two statutes 
harmonised to that extent. In addressing this question, the Committee have 
been persuaded by the considerations of equity and justice to the citizen. It 
was urged before the Committee by Ministry of Urban Development, who 
are the nodal agency in regard to RAIP Act, that the provisions of RAIP 
Act in regard to compensation were more advantageous as the owner of the 
property gets its market price on the date of acquisition which reflects the 
appreciation in the value of property during the period intervening between 
the requisition and acquisition of the property. It has further been 
contended that such appreciation in the value of property often exceeded the 
combined effect of solatium and cumulative interest on the amount of 
compensation. Therefore, any amendment to the RAIP Act, 1952 has not 
been considered necessary by the Ministry. 


5.49 The Committee feel that in advancing this argument the perspective 
of the Ministry appears to have been shaped by presumption that properties 
are requisitiened and acquired only in urban areas where values appreciate 
relatively faster. However, the Committee are aware that RAIP Act is being 
resorted to by the Government agencies, particularly the Ministry of 
Defence, on a significant scale in requisitioning. and acquiring rural 
properties also including agricultural land. 


5.50 Nevertheless, it has been suggested by the Ministry of Urban 
Development that owners of the property can be given an option to receive 
compensation under either of the two statutes subject to the condition that 
property under requisition is allowed to remain under requisition for a 
further period of three years from the date on which the decision to acquire 
is communicated to the owner and whereafter the owner would cease to get 
monthly recurring compensation. Instead he would be entitled to receive 
solatium as well as interest at the prescribed rates. 


5.51 The Committee find the arguments advanced by the Ministry of 
Urban Development are not relevant to the main issue which concerns the 
payment of solatium in compensation for the element of compulsion involved 
in acquisition of property. They are convinced beyond doubt that the RAIP 
Act overlooks the aspect of compulsion involved in acquisition of properties, 
it is inquitous. In this regard they are supported by courts of law. 


104 


Recommendation 

The Committee firmly believe that RAIP Act be amended without any 
delay so as to provide for payment of solatium in cases where any 
requisitioned property is sought to be acquired. However, till such an 
amendment is made, the Committee recommend that owners of the property 
should be given an option to receive compensation either on the pattern of 
Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952 or Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894. 


Conclusion 


5.52 The Committee note that section 11(2) of the Land Acquisition Act, 
1894 provides for determination of compensation through negotiation. 
However, the State Government have not encouraged Collectors to enter 
into negotiated awards perhaps because of the inherent potential of 
subjective approach being followed by individual Collectors. 


During evidence the Secretary, Ministry of Defence stated that the 
Ministry are keen to follow the method of determining compensation 


through negotiations as major policy change and they will definitely try it 
out in their future efforts for acquisition. 


Recommendation 


5.53 The Committee feel that the land Acquiring Department should 
explore possibility of entering into a negotiated award as contemplated in 
Section 11(2) of the Land Acquisition Act. They believe that by entering into 
negotiated awards the long drawn out legal process for enhancement of 
compensation and payment of interest for the intervening period, which add 
up to a considerable amount, can perhaps be avoided. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that when the process of land acquisition proceedings 
is initiated, a Committee comprising the Representatives of the Acquiring 
Department, and the Land Acquisition Collector concerned should be 
constituted to hold negotiations with interested persons for settlement of the 
amount of compensation. 


Conclusion 


5.54 The Committee are deeply concerned about the long and unhappy 
delays in the actual disbursement of compensation to the land owners. The 
Committee are of the view that at present the requisition or acquisition of 
land is in itself a trauma for the land loser and his family. They are also 
comscious of the fact that once the Government acquires the land which is 
the only means of his/her livelihood, then the trauma multiplies with every 
passing day. 

Recommendation 


5.55 The Committee desire the Ministry to take all steps considered 
necessary so as to improve the situation wherein disbursement of 
compensation to land losers is made after protracted delay. They 


105 


recommend that as a first step, the Ministry of Defence should seek from 
the DEOs in the field formations a statement of outstanding cases of 
payment of compensation to land losers on declaration of the awards and 
thereafter draw up a programme to liquidate all such outstanding 
compensation within a fixed time-frame. 


The Committee also expect the Ministry to devise a scheme with a view 
to keeping a close watch over the actual disbursement of the 
compensation to the land owners. 


Conclusions 


5.56 The Committee find that according to Section 7 of the Rajasthan 
Land Cultivation Act and provision of Rajasthan Land Revenue Act 
Rajasthan Government is the owner of ail lands in Rajasthan. An 
agriculturist, under Section 10A of the Rajasthan Revenue Act and the 
rules made thereunder, can utilise the land for non-agricultural purposes 
with the permission of the State Government. 


The Committee have further been informed that where the private land 
in Rajasthan classified as agricultural within Municipal/urban limits is 
acquired, the concerned land holder (agriculturist/khatedar) would claim 
for compensation as admissible on agricultural land at the prevailing 
market value for the corresponding agricultural land in the vicinity/area. 
After acquisition, the land can be utilised in this case by the Ministry of 
Defence for non-agricultural purposes on conversion only for which the 
state Government, who is the owner, is entitled to recover conversion fee 
on the prescribed rates for residential areas in that vicinity. Where 
agricultural lands of private land holders are acquired for Ministry of 
Defence apart from the compensation payable to the concerned land 
holder under the Land Acquistion Act, State Government also claims a 
specified amount to compensate for permanent loss of revenue from such 
lands. 


This policy according to the State Government has been in operation 
with the concurrence of the Ministry of Defence for the past more than 
10 years. The amount of compensation payable to the land holder for 
acquisition of his land and to the State Government as conversion charge 
for permanent loss of revenue are both deducted from the amount 
deposited by the requisitioning agencies for acquisition of such land. 


5.57 In this connection the Committee would like to point out that 
Defence Estates organisation who is the field agency for acquisition of 
land, are expected to be fully aware of and conversant with the 
provisions of the Rajasthan Land Cultivation Act and Land Revenue Act 
which mandate additional heavy payment on account of: conversion 
charges from the Department acquiring of private land in Municipal 
limits in areas as notified within the Master Pian/City Improvement 
Authority and if there is no notified 
from the Municipal limits and 


rE 
i 
ft 
tf 


106 


acquisitions also contravene the policy guideline that the sites selected for 
acquisition should be away from the township so that the land acquired is 
not expensive. 

Recommendations 


5.58 The Committee would recommend that instructions may be issued to 
all Command /Formations/local Defence Estate organisations to comply with 
the guidelines laid down for selection of sites for acquisition. 


5.59 The Committee expect the Ministry of Defence to ensure that the 
field level officers of Defence Estate Organization are fully conversant with 
the rules and regulations of various State Governments governing 
acquisition of land 


CHAPTER VI 
REQUISITIONING OF PROPERTY 


6.1 The Committee enquired from the Ministry of Defence which 
method in obtaining possession and use of land viz. acquiring, 
requisitioning or hiring in the long run, was more economical. The 
Ministry of Defence in a note furnished to the Conrmittee have stated: 


‘When the occupancy right of the land of an individual is taken 
by another individual on payment of rent by mutual agreement, it 
is a case of hiring of the land. Lands belonging to ether 
governmental organisations are also taken over on hire by the 
Ministry of Defence e.g. lands belonging to the Railways are in 
occupation at various places for the use of the Movement Control 
Units. 


When the occupancy rights of land are obtained irrespective of 
the concurrence of the holder of the land, but by exercise of 
statutory authority under the RAIP Act, (earlier the Befence of 
India Act too) it is requisitioning. If lands are required at certain 
locations but the right of certain occupants to receive 
compensation is not clear or the number of persons involved is 
large to negotiate or the concurrence of all the persons cannot be 
had or the persons entitled to alienate the rights of occupancy 
cannot be settled without dispute, the lands are requisitioned. The 
occupancy rights are secured by the requisition. 


In respect of requisitioned lands, the Government also has a 
right to put the land to any use, subject only to a liability to pay 
compensation for damages, if any, at the time of release of the 
land from requisition, if it is released. Hence, the site can be used 
for construction purposes, for ranges or for training, or for 
anything which could even change the lay of the land. Lands taken 
on hire cannot be altered to our Defence requirements by 
construction, or otherwise. The land is hired only if it is envisaged 
to be used for short periods and no permanent assets are expected 
to be created on that. All the lands occupied during the course of 
movement and occupation by Forces during military operations can 
be regularised only by hiring as there is no retrospective requisition 
or acquisition. 


In the case of acquisition of the land the total cost of the 
property together with solatium is paid. The Government is free to 


107 


108 


use the land thereafter in any way. In the matter of requisition 
only rental compensation and compensation for damage that is 
done during the period of occupancy are paid. The cost of the land 
is not paid. Recognising the factor that land value appreciates, the 
tent paid is even less than the interest on the capital value of the 
land. From the point of utilisation and expenditure, requisitioning 
is a cheaper option for the Government than acquiring. But, the 
social cost is quite different. The individual whose land is taken 
Over, on requisition, is deprived of the full cost of land. He gets 
only a rent. He is unable to re-establish himself if he is only a 
cultivator, by purchasing land to start cultivation and to build a 
house for himself, if he is dispossessed from his house. This is 
harsh. Hence, people are against requisitioning their properties. In 
the case of hiring which is done with mutual consent, no owner 
will be willing to part with his land for a mere rent for an 
indefinite period as his capital gets blocked. Although 
requisitioning is the cheaper alternative, in the long run acquisition 
18 a better and socially acceptable alternative.” 


Time limit to hold a preperty en requisities 


6.2 In a note to the Committee, the Ministry stated that there was no 
upper limit to the period for which a property could be held on requisition 
under the DI Acts and the RAIP Act. Properties had continued on for 
decades on requisition. But, an amendment introduced to the RAIP Act in 
March 1985 fixed 17 years as the upper limit of holding on to q property 
under requisition. 


6.3 The Committee desired to know whether any requisitioned property 
was still being retained by the Defence Authorities beyond the period of 
17 years as specified in the RAIP (Amendment) Act, 1985. The Ministry 
of Defence informed that no requisitioned properties had been retained 
beyond the period of 17 years specified in the RAIP (Amendment) Act 
1985 


6.4 Asked to explain the rationable for a period of 17 years for holding a 
property on requisition, the DGDE of the Ministry of Defence stated 
during evidence: 


“The Act was first amended in 1970 to provide that the 
requisitioned property should be acquired or derequisitioned within 
8 period of three years. But the Government could not take a 
decision within a period of three years on all cases. Various 
Departments of the Government held properties. Then they went 
before the Parliament in 1973 to get the Act further amended to 
change the period from three years to five years. At the end of the 
5 years period viz. in March, 87, since decision on all properties 
had not been taken the Act was amended to provide for 10 years 
in 1975, and likewise, later in 1980 to 15 years that took us to 


109 


1985. They went before the Parliament again in 1985 to get the 
period amended by revising the period by 2 years. The Minister 
also gave an assurance the period would not be further amended. 
Like that, the period came to 17 years. There is no other sanctity 
for the period of 17 years.” 


6.5 The Committee pointed out that requisitioning of property is 
normally held in case of emergency threatening the security of the nation, 
natural calamities, etc. and sought the justification from the Ministry for 
keeping provision of a long period of 17 years for holding on to the 
requisitioned property. The Ministry of Urban Bevelopment in their note 
to the Committee stated: 


“It is considered that a period of 17 years for requisitioning a 
property for an office of the Union Government or other Public 
Purposes of the Union is not unduly long because it may net be 
possible to create permanent structures for projects and temporary 
establishments; and (ii) the purpose for which the property has 
been requisitioned may necessitate requisitioning for fairly long 
periods.” 


6.6 The Committee enquired why the Ministry of Urban Development 
persisted for the period of seventeen years as stated in their written reply. 
In his evidence before the Committee, the Additional Secretary of the 
Ministry of Urban Development stated: 


“To be very frank, we wanted to get a list as far as our Ministry 
is concerned where the lands have been requisitioned for the 
purpose of our Ministry, where the completion of projects may 
have been taken a much longer peried. I have not been able to lay 
my hands on any such project because as far as our Ministry is 
concerned, we have been requisitioning property mainly for office 
purposes or residential purposes. When we did assert that though 
the five years will be inadequate and seventeen years may 
continue, we had in mind the projects like may be in rural 
development area and defence projects about which we do not 
have adequate information. I concede that as far as the purposes 
for which our Ministry has requisitioned lands, seventeen years 
may not be necessary.” 


6.7 Replying to a query, the representative of the Ministry of Urban 
Development stated: 


‘““As regards the operation of the RAIP Act, though we are the 
nodal Ministry, authority has been delegated to the various 
Ministries, etc., where authority has been delegated, ‘we really do 
not monitor what is happening.” 


110 


6.8 Explaining the requirements of requisitioned properties, the Director 
General, Defence Estates stated: 


“When the Defence of India Act came to an end, certain 
properties that we were holding, we wanted to continue to hold 
them. Those properties comprised both land and buildings by 
Armed Forces, Navy, etc. at various places. The 1947 and 1952 
Acts provided for extension upto 1958. But by that time, neither 
the Defence: Ministry nor the other Ministries had come to a 
decision that we could either acquire or relinquish those 
properties. Meanwhile the Defence of India Act 1962 came in and 
the Army required new locations to quarter the Forces and a lot of 
land was requisitioned. When that Act was repealed in 1968, we 
had not reached the stage where all these lands could be held or 
something could be given up. 


Initially, a decision was to be taken within three years. But since 
a decision did not emerge till 1973, Government came before ,the 
Parliament for extension upto 1975. Again, by 1975, Government 
had not taken a decision. We again came before the Parliament 
and requested for extension upto 1980. Again we asked for 
extension up to 1985 and then 1987. This is how the period of 
seventeen years came.” 


6.9 Giving views of the Ministry of Defence on requisitioning period, the 
Additional Secretary stated: 


“A period of five to ten years may be maximum period. It is 
desirable that the Act be amended.” 


Revision of Recurring Compensation 


6.10 In a note that the Ministry stated that Section 8(1) of the RAIP 
Act, 1952 had provided for payment of recurring compensation for the 
requisitioned property. This had not provided for any periodic revision of 
the recurring compensation which in fact is a ‘rent’. No provision for 
revision of rent had existed in the Cefence of India Act 1939/1962 or the 
rules made thereunder. an amendment was made in March 1975 by 
inserting Sub-Section (2) (a) to Sec. ‘8 of the RAIP Act to provide that 
where a property had been subject to requisition under the Act for a 
period of 5 years or longer immediately preceding the commencement of 
the Amendment Act in 1975 the recurring compensation be reviewed and, 
thereafter, at 5S years interval. This gave a relief to the dispossessed 
persons in the form of a more reasonable rent compensating for inflation 
and the loss of accrned benefit (on account of the development that may 
have taken place in the vicinity). 


Conclusions 


6.11 The Committee note that during the Second World War lands and 
buildings were requisitioned under the Defence of India Act, 1939. 


111 


Subsequently, the buildings requisitioned under Defence of India Act, 1939 
were continued under requisition under the provisions of Requisitioned 
Land (Continuance of Powers) Act 1947 (17 of 1947). However to extend 
such requisitions further in order to meet the demand for lands and 
buildings for the purposes of the Union, the Requisitioning and Acquisition 
of Immovable Property Ordinance was promulgated on 25.1.52 to repeal 
Act 17 of 1947. The Ordinance was replaced by Requisitioning and 
Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952. No time limit for holding a 
property under requisition was laid down in the original Act, since the Act 
itself was enacted for a period of 6 years. The Committee are apprised that 
at that time the intention was to keep the period limited to a maximum of 6 
years. Since the concerned authorities in the various Departments of 
Government could not take any decision either to acquire requisitioned 
properties or to release the already requisitioned property within the period 
laid down in the Act, amendments were made in the Requisitioning and 
Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, from time to time, to extend the 
maximum period for which the properties could be retained under 
requisition. 


6.12 The Committee find that as per an amendment carried out in 1985, 
the requisitioning period was further extended by two years and eventually 
a period of 17 years has been prescribed as the maximum period for which 
a property can be kept under requisition, even though the Minister of 
Works and Housing had given an assurance to the Parliament that all the 
Departments of the Government were being asked to restore all the 
requisitioned properties to the owners within two years. 


The Committee find no rational justification for this unusually long 
retention period of seventeen years during which deprive the citizens to use 
their properties. The Committee find the period of 17 years to be largely 
towards the citizen. The Committee are convinced that a maximum period 
of six years will be the reasonable time limit for acquiring or releasing the 
requisitioned properties. The Committee recommend that the RAIP Act, 
1952 may be amended accordingly. 


Conclusion 


6.13 The Committee find that in order to meet the statutory requirement 
of release of requisitioned properties within the specified period it is 
imperative that a proper watch over the release of the requisitioned 
properties by various Ministries/Departments of the Government is kept. 


Recommendation 


The Committee desire that the Ministry of Urban Development who are 
the nodal Ministry for the RAIP Act, should impress upon all the 
Ministries/Departments to take expeditious action for timely release of 
requisitioned properties. It should be made clear that it is the responsibility 
of each Ministry/Department which has requisitioned the properties to 
ensure that these are acquired only when conditions specified in the Act for 


2146LS-17 


112 


acquisition are fulfilled or released from requisition within the period 
specified in the Act. The Committee desire that in cases where there is delay 
and the provisions of the Act are violated, apart from releasing immediately 
such properties the responsibility may be invariably fixed and suitable 
administrative action taken against the officers found guilty of negligence or 
apathy. 


Conclusions 


6.14 The existing provision in the RAIP Act, 1952 for revision of 
‘recurring part’ of compensation in respect of requisitioned properties, as 
amended in March, 1975, are that the person whose property has been 
requisitioned would after five years apply to the Government and get thie 
compensation amount be fixed by mutual agreement. However, if there is 
disagreement, the Act provides that both the parties will jointly appoint an 
Arbitrator and the decision of the arbitrator would be binding on both. 


The Committee feel that it is unfair to retain the requisitioned properties 
without just and fair compensation to the people whose properties have been 
requisitioned. The Committee note that the Ministry of Urban Development 
have already deemed it fit to provide for revision of rent in the Delhi Rent 
Coatral Act every three years. In order to compensate the dispossessed 
persens for inflation that erodes the real value of compensation the 
Committee recommend that the RAIP Act, 1952 be amended to provide for 
revision of the recurring part of compensation after the expiry of every 
three years. 


Recommendation 


6.15 The Committee also flad it reasonable that in accordance with the 
principles for payment of compensation enshrined in the Land Acquisition 
Act, 1894 and additional amount as a percentage of the recurring part of 
the compensation should also be paid to the land owner as solatium because 
in the opinidn of the Committee the land owner is equally helpless in the 
matter of requisition under RAIP Act, 1952. 


CHAPTER VII 
MANAGEMENT OF LAND 
Title Deeds, Plans and Demarcation of Boundaries 


7.1 The Ministry of Defence in a note furnished 0 the 
Committee intimated the following summed up position regarding 
title deeds, plans and demarcation of boundaries in respect of 
defence lands inside and outside Cantonments: 


“(a) The Defence Lands inside Cantonments 


1. Complete records of rights/title -are not available in 
respect of the following categories of lands: 


(a) Lands which came into the hands of the 
Government by right of conquest or Treaty with the 
then Ruler, or on payment of compensation श the 
18th and. the major part of the 19th Century. 


(b) Permission for occupation of lands at (a) above 
are given under Military Regulations of the three 
Presidencies of Bengal, Madras and Bombay. These 
aré now known as ‘Old Grants’. These papers are 
not, generally, available. 


2. Leases granted under Cantonment Code 1899, Cantt. 
Code 1912, Cantonments Land Administration Rules 1925 
and Cantonments Land Administration Rules 1937. These 
are held in the custody of concerned Defence Estates 
Officer. 

(b) Land Acquired 

Lands for field firing ranges, military stations, airfields 
etc. were acquired under Land Acquisition Act 1894, DI 
Act, RAIP Act 1952 etc. Records of rights along with 
requisite plans are held by Defence Estates Service in 
respect of these lands. These lands are also got mutuated 
in concerned Revenue records as ‘Defence Lands’. These 
documents are available. 


(c) Defence Lands. outside Cantonments 


Title deeds/records of rights in respect of these lands are 
available except in respect of properties of Ex State Forces 
which merged in the Indian Army. The Board proceedings 


113 


114 


are not very comprehensive in that it does not indicate the full 
description of the properties. 


All defence lands outside Cantonments are recorded in a register 
known as the Military Lands Register.” 


Demarcation and verification of boundaries inside Cantonments 


7,2 The limits of Cantonments are defined by notification in the Official 
Gazette by the Central Government issued under Section 3 of the 
Cantonments Act, 1924. Boundary pillars are erected to demarcate the 
outer boundary of each Cantonment. The boundaries of all Cantonments 
are required to be compared annually on the ground with the Gazetted 
description of the same and a certificate in this regard is required to be 
furnished to the GOC-in-Chief, the Command together with a report of 
any pillars damaged or missing and of any encroachment on the 
boundaries. Defence lands inside Cantonment are placed under the control 
and management of various authorities viz. military authorities, Defence 
Estates Officer and the Cantonment Board. All these authorities are 
required to verify annually the lands placed under their management/ 
control. 


7.3 Rule 10 of the Rules for the Acquisition, Custody, Relinquishment, 
etc. of Military Lands in India (A.C.R. Rules), 1944 enjoins upon the 
Military Estates Officer after assuming the possession of the land, to call 
upon the local officer. on 


(i) to erect boundary pillars; 
(ii) to prepare a plan on a suitable scale; and 
(iii) to draw of a description of the boundaries. 


7.4 On completion of the above procedure the plan and description of 
the boundaries will be verified by a Committee convened by the local 
military authority at the request of the Military Estates Officer and 
consisting of the local military authority, the Chief Revenue Officer of the 
district, or their representatives, the local officer of the Military Engineer 
Services and the Military Estates Officer. If the personal attendance of the 
local military authority is impossible, a senior officer should be deputed to 
represent him. The proceedings of the Committee will be prepared in 
quadruplicate; one copy with the original plan and description will be 
retained by the Military Estates Officer; one copy with a copy of the plan 
and description will be forwarded by the Military Estates Officer to the 
local military authority; third copy Military Estates Officer through the 
Revenue Officer to the State Government; and the fourth copy with a 
copy of the plan and description will be submitted by the Military Estates 
Officer to the Defence Department in all plans accompanying the 
proceedings of a Committee, the area of the land acquired will be stated in 
English measurement. 


115 


When forwarding a copy of the proceedings to the Defence Department, 
the Military Estates Officer will also forward a certificate to the effect that 
the necessary entries have been made in the Military Lands Register, or 
Military Tenancy Register, as the case may be. 


However, it is a fact that in a number of cases of acquisition these works 
are yet to be done. 


Outside Cantonments 


7.5 Defence lands outside Cantonments are managed by the Head of the 
Department or the Service concerned for whom the land is held, and by 
the Defence Estates Officer in other cases. The local officers of the 
Department, or Service concerned and the Defence Estates Officer, as the 
case may be are required to carry out inspection of the holdings of the 
land placed under their management and to verify boundary pillars of at 
least 20% of the holding every year and of every holding at least once in 
every five years. 


Organisational Structure 


7.6 The Defence Estates Organistion is the field agency of the Ministry 
of Defence for hiring, requisition, acquisition and disposal of immovable 
property apart from administering the Cantonments and the defence lands. 


7.7 In a written note, the Ministry of Defence have stated that “The 
DGDE oranisation had an authorised strength of 55 Class I officers, 27 
Class II officers and 416 Class III staff in November, 1962 when the 
responsibility for hiring/requisition of immovable properties was entrusted 
to it. In the next five years 327 Class III staff were temporarily sanctioned 
in phases. In 1970, after a study by the Staff Inspection Unit of the 
Ministry of Finance, 128 more Class III posts were created and the 
temporary posts were made permanent. By 1972, 95 Class I and 59 Class II 
Officers were authorised. Thereafter, substantial acquisition work also 
accrued as would be seen from the extent of area added to the defence 
owned holdings after 1970, 17.49 lakhs acres in 1980 against 16.41 lakh 
acres in 1970. In 1990 the authorised establishment is 138 Group A, 59 
Group B and 871 Group C Staff. The Staff strength of Defence Estates 
Organisation is inadequate considering the number of acquisition proposals 
and the high increase in the number of Court Cases (14,520 in July 90)”. 


7.8 Many land acquisition proposals are implemented through Special 
L.A. stafff sanctioned for the purpose of the concerned State Governments 
but paid for by the Government of India. 


7.9 The establishment of the Collector of every district has certain staff 
to perform the duties connected with acquisition of land in the district. 
However, when large-scale acquisition is undertaken some staff have to be 
exclusively assigned to deal with the task. The normally authorised staff 
may not be adequate when a large scale acquisition takes place. If the 
State Governments find it difficult or are reluctant to create additional 
staff on their establishment for this purpose, the essential requirement has 


116 


to be met by the Defence Ministry. The responsibility for the recruitment, 
posting, supervision and control of such staff is that of the Collector/State 
Government while the expenses (pay and allowances, accommodation, 
transport, office maintenance, telephone etc.) are reimbursed by the 
Ministry of Defence. Such authorisations and reimbursement of 
expenditure are not made where the State Government charges in 
establishment cost as a percentage of the acquisition compensation. Assam, 
West Bengal, Orissa etc. levy such charge as a percentage rate on the 
compensation. Special staff were authorised in Punjab, Rajasthan, M.P., 
Tamil Nadu. Maharashtra etc. Such staff perform the assigned functions. 


7.10 The details of staff sanctioned in various Commands for the Special 
Land Acquisition Officers for Defence land acquisition were furnished. 
The staff is sanctioned, normally, for periods of six months or one year at 
a time, on the demand of the Land Acquisition Collector, as accepted by 
the Director, Defence Estates of the Command. The staff have to continue 
even when certain land acquisition proposals have ceased to be under 
implementation in the sense of taking over possession of the lands and 
disbursement of compensation under the Award. Some element of staff is 
required to be continued as long as there are land references to be 
disposed off by the Court and the volume of such work is not within the 
capacity of the staff otherwise authorised by the State Government to the 
Collector. 


7.11 The present organisational strength in the Defence Estates 
Organisation of the Ministry of Defence was stated to be inadequate and a 
need was being felt for augumenting it. On being asked to explain the 
basis and about the steps being taken for strengthening of the Defence 
Estates Organisation, the Ministry of Defence stated: 


“The staff for the DEQOs was. sanctioned, largely on the 
recommendations of the Staff Inspection Unit of the Ministry of 
Finance on the basis of workload in 1968—70, when the Unit 
conducted a work-study of the MEO’s establishments. At that time 
there were very few litigation cases regarding compensation for 
lands being acquired for defence purposes. Also, there were very 
few acquisition cases every year. 


(2) Presently there are 10,300 cases of litigation in District Courts, 
1,459 cases in High Courts and 718 cases in the Supreme Court. 
The litigations linger on for years. With the existing establishment, 
the DEOs find it difficult to regularly detail staff to contact the 
Government Counsels and to arrange production of witnesses 
(when the land references are considered by the District. Courts) 
and to attend the High Courts/Supreme Court to brief the 
Counsels. Apart from these activities the staff have also to be 
‘regularly deputed by the DEQOs to attend various reccee-cum- 


117 


siting-cum-costing Boards which the Users order for the utilisation 
of the existing lands and for formulating proposals for additional 
lands at various locations. The jurisdiction of some of the DEOs 
is also very large, with the result that communication and 
transportation are time-consuming. For example, 2 DEOs cover 
the whole of Rajasthan; 2 DEOs cover the whole of Madhya 
Pradesh; 1 DEO the whole of Tamil Nadu and Kerala and 1 
DEO the whole of Karnataka. Some DEOs do not have vehicles 
to move to various locations. They don’t have legally qualified 
staff to attend to litigations, specially as the District Attorneys 
and the Government Standing Counsels do not render adequate 
and timely support in dealing with the court cases. The large 
number of Execution Petitions and Contempt of Court 
proceedings for payment of enhanced compensation, has been a 
cause for concern. 


(3) The number of offices of the DEQOs and the staffing structure 
require to be reassessed, to ensure timely/effective attention. On 
the basis of the Establishment Study Team's analysis, the 
authorised staff will have to be re-worked taking into account the 
extent of land acquisition, fresh proposals under consideration, 
and the attention to be paid to the litigations. Department of 
Expenditure has been postponing the taking up of the study 
despite repeated requests. 


(4) Leaving the task of conducting litigations (on compensation 
cases) entirely to the District Attorneys and Standing Counsels, 
who have not shown adequate accountability, has not proved a 
satisfactory arrangement. Posting of full time legal officers, 
accountable to the DEO/ Director, is bound to ease the situation. 
All Compensation enhancement cases could then be made the 
responsibility of the DEO and the Law Officer, relieving the 
State Government/Collector of such responsibility. For dedicated 
legal support on matters connected with compensation, it is 
desirable that at each Directorate and in the office of the DEOs 
having large number of Reference/ Appeal cases, an officer of the 
Ministry of Law or the Legal Department of the State 
Government should be provided. These officers could be of the 
level of Asstt. Legal Adviser/Deputy ‘Legal Adviser of the 
Ministry of Law who can render and yet on (behalf of Ministry of 
Law) the statements in defence/appeal and also liaise with the 
Government Counsel/District Attorney for proper conduct of the 
compensation cases. Recruiting, as part of the establishment of 
the DEO/Director, legally qualified persons will not be a 
satisfactory arrangement as reasonable career prospects cannot be 
ensured for them. They would soon become a frustrated lot. The 
Law Officers could be positioned on deputation basis and 


118 


withdrawn when there is inadequate work load or given longer 
jurisdictions, to support 2 or more DEOs.” 


(5) The sanctioned and posted strength of officers and staff at 
different levels, during the last ten years is shown below: 


Year Gp A GEO Gp BADEO Gp 8 Gp C Gp D 
(14 cate.) (8 cate.) 


A P A P A P A P A P 
1981 1160 90 29 22 30 29 07 856 339 334 
1982 116 W 24 20 31 29 871 867 339 339 
1983 116 9 थ4 21 1 29 871 871 339 337 
1984 116 1086 24 24 3३31 31 87 866 339 333 
1985 116 116 24 24 3३31 3३31 हा 86 339 333 
1986 116 116 24 24 31 31 हा 859 339 327 
1987 138 111 244 24 31 31 87 ह8ह57 339 327 
1988 138 134 24 24 35 33 887 851 339 332 
1989 138 128 24 24 35 33 867 862 339 339 
1990 138 119 24 24 35 32 871 855 339 382 


Gp—Group 
A—Authorised Strength 
P—Posted Strength (Actual) 


(6) The reasons for the shortage of officers have been the following:— 


(i) The reluctance of the candidates recommended by the UPSC 
on the results of the Civil Services examination to join the cadre 
when allocated. “. 


(ii) Resignations of Officers, on getting other jobs, they consider 
more attractive. 


(111) Delays in holding DPCs for promotions on account of Court 
Orders. 


The shortages of staff in Groups ‘C’ and ‘D’ have been only marginal 
and only due to the lead time involved in completing the due process of 
appointment. 


Inadequate staff/officer strength can be remedied by authorising more 
personnel, on the basis of a critical study. The Establishment Study 
Team of the Ministry of Finance has still to complete the requisite 
study.” 


7.12 The Committee enquired when and at what level the matter was 
referred to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) for 
taking up the study for staffing structure of DEO’s office on the basis 
of current workload and what was the outcome. To this, the Ministry of 
Defence in their note stated as follows: 


“(i) In 1986-87, DGDE carried out an in~house review of the 
staff requirements of the field offices of the Defence Estates 


119 


Organisation, on the basis of the agreed “norms” of 1969. 
Proposals for additional staff on the basis of new work-load on 
land acquisition and litigation were also included. 


(ii) Besides, a work study of the staff requirements of the 
Regional Directorates was conducted by the Establishment Study 
Team in 1987-88. The recommendations of this study were 
accepted and a formal sanction issued in June 88, covering the five 
Command Directorates. 


(iii) A proposal for work study of Gps ‘B’, ‘C’ and ‘D’ staff of the 
field offices was submitted by the DGDE in January 89 which was 
referred by the Ministry of Defence (Finance) to the Establishment 
Study Team in April 89 at DFA level. Since the Staff Inspection 
Unit (SIU) was pre-occupied with studies of other Defence 
Organisations, they agreed to select a few offices of DEOs for spot 
studies to finalise their staff requirements. However, due to their 
other pressing commitments, the SIU could not undertake this 
task. In September 1990, the SIU sought some basic information 
before they could take up the spot study at Guwahati, Tezpur and 
Jorhat. DGDE are of the view that the study should commence 
from Northern Command and Western Command, bacause of the 
heavy load of litigation, work; in the Eastern Command, such 
problems are not acute. 


(iv) The ministry of Defence has already taken up a cadre review 
of the Group ‘A’ posts in IDES which involves an increase of 
group ‘A’ posts from 138 to 229. The proposal has been examined 
initially by Defence (Finance) and it is being further processed in 
the light of the observations made by finance. 


A cadre review of the subordinate staff is also in hand. A ‘draft 
propoal in this regard has been formulated and discussed with 
Defence (Finance). This exercise will also be completed on priority 
basis.” 


Delegation of Powers 


7:13 The power delegated for according financial sanctions in the matter 
of requisition and acquisition of property as fixed in 1978, are shown 
below: 


Designation of Officer Financial limit 
Assistant Director General/Deputy Director Rs. 5 lakhs 
Deputy Director General/Director Rs. 10 lakhs 
Director-General Rs. 1 crore 


7.14 The Ministry in a note to the Committee stated that present 


2146LS-18 


120 


delegation is not adequate because of the progressive escalation in the cost 
of lands and buildings, the inflation and the new elements in the 
compensations to be awarded, from 1984 onwards. 


It was also stated that the Formation Commanders were delegated 
powers to requisition and hire immovable properties. The powers 


delegated were as under: 


HIRING AND REQUISITIONING OF IMMOVABLE PROPERTY 
COMPETENT ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITIES: 


Designation of Officer Financial Limit 
(a) GOC-in-C/equivalent Naval Rs.50,000/-per property 
Commander/ AOC-in-C 
(b) Commander of a Corps, Division/ Rs.25,000/-per property 
Area, Indep Sub-Area or Indep Bde Gp/ , 


equivalent Naval/Air Force Commander 


(c) Commander of a Bde, or Sub Area/ _Rs.5,000/-per property 
equivalent Naval/Air Force 
Commander. 


These powers both for hiring and requisitionship are calculated as 
follows: 


(a) Initial amount of non recurring compensation, if any, ptus one 
year’s rental/recurring compensation. 


(0) The term ‘per property’ means immovable property i.e., 
land/buildings hired or requisitioned at a point of time for the 
same purpose irrespective of the fact whether the property/ 
properties is/are owned by one person or more persons. 


Practically all the cases of hiring and requisition of properties have been 
done undcr these delegated powers as rare'y a need arose to raise the case 
to the Government’s level. Thus, the lands shown as requisitioned or hired 
are practically all under the powers of the Formation Commanders. Those 
lands are the sum totals of a large number of cases. When such 
requisitioned lands are to be acquired it is with the specific approval of the 
Government, as no power has been delegated for acquiring land. 


7.15 The Ministry further stated that during the Emergency declared in 
1962 and 1971, powers had been delegated to the Formation Commanders 
to sanction requisition of lands and buildings to meet their locally 
perceived immediate requirements. After the RAIP Act was amended in 
1985 to provide an upper limit of 17 years to hold property on requisition, 
it was also decided too withdraw the powers given locally. Consequently, 
decisions on the need to requisition any property were taken at the level of 
the Government. Even in this regard, decisions to requisition property are 
taken only in consultation with the Ministry of Urban Development which 


121 


is the nodal Ministry in matters regarding the AIP Act. in view of 
instructions issued by Ministry of Works & Housing on 250 April 1985. 


7.16 During evidence, director General Defence Estate informed that 
delegation of financial powers to Formation commanders for requisitioning 
and hiring of immovable properties was laid down in 1962. 


7.17 Enquired what enhanced delegation of financial powers was 
currently needed, the Ministry of Defence in their note to the Committee 


stated as follows: 


“After the cost is estimated on the basis of revised methods and, 
when the compensation is to be approved (in the case of 
acquisition by recourse to RAIP Act) the financial power of Joint 
Director DE/ Director DE and the Director General DE should be 
raised to a margin within 40%, 75% and 100% respectively beyond 
the cost reflected in the administrative sanction. In the cases of 
enhancement higher than these, the approval of the Government 
could be taken. 


If the scheme of negotiated Awards, by recourse to section 11(2) 
of the LA Act, is brought into application, in respect of acquisition 
in which the financial effect is less than Rs, 10 lakhs, the DEO 
together with an authorised representative of Department of 
Defence (Finance) (an AFA) and the Collector could be 
authorised to settle the Compensation. Where the financial effect is 
between Rs. 10 lakhs and Rs. 1 crore, the Joint Dirctor DE, the 
Collector and a representative of the Department of Defence 
(Finance) (a DFA) could be authorised to settle the compensation. 
Where the amount of compensation exceeds Rs. 1 crore but is less 
than Rs. 5 crores, the consent award could be negotiated by Addl. 
DG, DE or the Director, DE, the collector and a representative of 
the Department of Defence (Finance) (an Add. FA/Director). In 
all other cases, the approval of the Government should be taken. 


In all cases of enhancement of compensation, on the orders of 
the Distirct Court/High Court/Supreme Court, the enhanced 
element (including interest) could be deposited in the Court by the 
Director, DE and the Command Hars could authorise payment 
under “Suspense Head” pending receipt of revised sanction, if no 
stay order against the judgement of the Court is available could be 
had on the appeal, if any, filed. Where stay order is obtained, the 
disbursement will be withheld. The Court may be requested to 
take adequate security if the amount deposited is to be disbursed 
when an appeal is pending. When the appeals are disposed of, the 
payment made from “Suspense Head” could be appropriately 
adjusted. This will reduce the accumulating interest which is at 
15% per annum and also the same need for the attachment of 
property and its possible subsequent auction which invariably 


122 


fetches very small price. Within such a modified approach, it is 
likely that there will be reduced incidence of Contempt 
proceedings, which are initiated as a co-ercive measure against the 
Govt.” 


Encroachments 


7.18 The Ministry of Defence in a note submitted to the Committee 
stated that encroachments and consequent problems are not exclusive to 
defence lands. These are there also on the lands of the State 
Governments/Railways/CPWD/Development Authorities like DDA, etc: 
and of the local bodies in Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi, Madras etc. and in 
respect of all large owners. None the less, the Ministry seriously intend to 
explore all possible avenues of improved management. 


7.19 The Ministry informed the Committee that as on Ist January 1990, 
there were 29,188 encroachments on Defence lands under the management 
of the DEOs and the Cantonment Boards, scattered all over the country. 
These involve an area measuring 3715 acres. Some of the abandoned air 
fields and camping grounds had been placed under the management of the 
District Collectors and they had leased out some of them for agricultural 
purposes. These lands were taken back from the State Governments in mid 
1950s, along with the encroachments, The encroachments on the camping 
grounds are mostly by way of unauthorised cultivation of land. Due to 
changes in the Government policy on leasing out the temporarily surplus 
defence lands for agricultural purpose, which now envisages leasing of the 
lands basically to the Ex-servicemen, some of the earlier cultivators of the 
lands became ineligible. The policy that had been in vogue since 1973 does 
not permit regularisation of leases in their favour. However, instead of, 
handing over the lands under their cultivation some of the old lesses 
resorted to litigations -interalia contending that such lands were not 
required for defence use. Some of the encroachments are of a recent 
origin. 


Land under enroachment 


Data in respect of encroachments .on defence land under the 
management of DEO/CEO for the years 1980, 1985 and 1990 is as 
under:— 


Year Total No. of Area in acres 
Encroachments 

3181 Dec., 1980 15392 Not readily available 

31st Dec., 1985 26064 3477 

Ist January, 1990 29188 3715 


The total number of encroachments as well as the land covered there- 


123 


under has been varying from year to year because some old encroachments 
are removed and some fresh encroachments are detected. 


Data regarding encroachments on the lands held by the Users (Army, 
Navy, Air Force, Ordinance Factories etc.) is not readily available. 


1996 encroachments covering an area of 209 acres were detected during 
the period Ist January 1989 to 31.12.89. 


Factors contributing to encroachments 


7.26 (1) In many instances like temporarily surplus defence lands, 
camping grounds, abandoned air field etc. the Ministry is an absentee 
landlord. When the federal system of administration was introduced (with 
the Government of India Act, 1935) lands which were the property of the 
Government were apportioned between the Provincial and Federal 
Governments as mandated in Sec. 172 of the Act. Some areas (e.g. 
camping grounds) which are then in actual occupation of the Army were 
reserved for defence use. But there was no meaningful management. The 
Collectors of the districts had given some of these on leases and many got 
encumbered with encroachments. When there was no air Force presence 
the abandoned air fields became prey to encroachments. Clusters of 
encroachments, initially, came up in somé places as a result of socio- 
political problems: eg. 


(i) during refugee influx in various areas, 

(ii) when people were displaced by natural calamities like floods; 

(111) large number of homeless labourers who came as construction or 
other workers during the expansion of the Forces from the 60s 
came to occupy nearby sites; 

(iv) with the eviction of occupants of the Servants Quarters and 
agricultural sites on the resumption of the Old Grant/lease sites 
for defence purposes; 

(v) overstyayal of agricultural lessees/non-renewal of the leases; 

(vi) encroachments following restrictions imposed on Old Grant sites 
on construction/reconstruction; 

(vii) lack of adequate vigilance at the stage of encroachment; 

(viii) inadequate manpower to keep watch and lack of men and 
material, and police/magisterial help to enforce law and order 
during removal of encroachers; 

(ix) stay orders being given by Courts, in deviation of the provisions of 
the PP Act 1971, on the enforcement of eviction orders; 

(x) stay orders being given at the Government’s level when eviction 
proceedings are under execution; 

(xi) the principle that has come to be socio-politically accepted during 
the past two decades that rehabilitation of encroachers is an 
obligation and that rehabilitation should procede removal of 
encroachment; 

(xii) organised colonisation and social resistance, and 


‘ 


124 


(xiii) most of the defence lands are not fenced. 


(2) Due to economic problems, labour migrate to urban areas from the 
rural areas. Such migration is more pronounce in metropolitan cities and 
industrial towns. This leads to development of slum/jhuggi-jhonpri colonies 
in the concerned city/town. The adjoining cantonment cannot remain 
isolated from the said development and the encroachments spill over the 
adjoining Cantonments. Encroachments in Bombay, Kanpur etc. are due 
to this. 


State Enactments/Cooperation 


7.21 As a welfare measure some of the state Governments have passed 
enactments conferring lease hold/patta rights on the encroachers upto 
specified date, eg. in Madhya Pradesh. These enactments contain provision 
for taking action against the officers who may evict the encroachers. The 
encroachers in the Cantonments claim the same benefits even though 
MODs policy does not permit such concessions/regularisation. 


Police/State Law enforcing authorities do not bestow adequate 
enthusiasm in removing the encroachments. 


steps taken to prevent unauthorised occupation 


7.22 In July, 1983 instructions were issued that all defence land in 
Cantonments which were prone to encroachments should be identified by 
the local military authorities and the DEO, by joint inspection. It has been 
specifically stated in this letters (i) that land around and adjacent to 
schools, railway stations, cinema houses, bus stops and religious places 
generally attract encroachers and that preventive measures should be 
adopted for use of such lands for the purposes compatiable with the type 
of institution to which the land adjoins. 


(11) In case of encroachments by institutions/places for ostensible 
religious purposes, if the encroachment cannot be got removed 
immediately with the assistance of the local civil authorities, the 
encroached area should be immediately fenced so as to contain the 
encroachment. 


(iii) strips of land in Cantonments should be used gradually for intensive 
tree planting. Where the area of land is so large that intensive tree 
planting is not possible without special staff and provision of funds, trees 
should be planted on the entire exposed periphery of the land to protect it 
form squatters. 


(iv) Inspection of the entire land under their management is to be 
carried out by the DEQs regularly every year either personally or through 
their senior technical staff. To ensure this, every visit of the DEO or of his 
technical staff to an out station should be utilised partly for inspection 
work. 


Instructions also exist for deputing a squad of officials by the DEOs for 


125 


the detection and removal of new encroachment on the land under their 
management. Such lands are required to be divided into sectors which are 
to be inspected by the squad and the result of the inspection in respect of 
each survey No. in this sector is to be entered in a register maintained for 
the purpose. 


Removal of Encroachments 


7.23 Encroachments from defence lands can be removed by resorting to 
the provisions of PPE Act 1971. Under the Act the Station Commander, 
the Defence Estate Officer and the Cantonment Executive Officer have 
been declared as the ‘Estate Officer’ in respect of lands under their 
management. The Act has been amended from time to time so as to confer 
more powers on the Estate Officer. Encroachment on public lands has 
been made a cognizable offence and powers have given to the Estate 
Officer to file an FIR for the arrest of the encroacher in a repeat case. 
Some encroachments can also be removed by recourse to Sec. 191(2) of 
the Cantonment Act, 1924. 


The major difficulty experienced in the removal of encroachments on 
defence land is the non-availability of adequate police/magisterial help. 
The law and order enforcing agencies are normally busy in more important 
work of maintaining law and order, elections, security of VIPs etc. and 
they do not attach priority to such work. It has also been the policy of the 
Government to arrange alternative rehabilitation of encroachers before 
they are evicted from lands. State Governments do not come forward to 
undertake rehabilitation of encroachers from defence lands unless 
substitute sites/cost of accommodation is deposited in advance. The Courts 
also frequently intervene on the side of the encroachers. 


Staff Involvement 


7.24 Action against an erring official can be taken only after his 
involvement, or connivance in abetting encroachments is established. No 
such case has so for been established against any official. 


Review of Encroachments 


7.25 The Ministry of Defence, through their letter of 17th October, 
1985, has conveyed decision/directions that a review of encroachments on 
non A-I land (i.e. land not in active occupation of Army, Navy, Air Force) 
should be carried out Cantonment-wise by a team of officers, comprising 
the Station Commander and the DEO concerned. This team is required to 
give recommendations as to which encroachments should be cleared and 
which may be allowed to continue (regularised) with reasons. 


7.26 In regard to details of recommendations regarding regularisation of 
encroachments made by the Team of Officers, Cantonment-wise, the 


126 


Ministry of Defence have in note submitted in February, 1991, stated the 

position as under:— 
“In an internal meeting held in the Ministry of Defence in 1985, a 
view was expressed that if certain enroachments on lands under the 
management of the Services/DEO cannot be removed, and are better 
regularised in situ, suitable proposals could be submitted to the Govt. 
for necessary action. No definite proposal on these lines for 
regularising the unauthorised occupancies has been received so far. In 
the Secunderabad Cantonment, some unauthorised Harijan colonies 
had come up on defence land. A proposal to regularise these 
encroachments and to give alternative land by the State Govt. to the 
Centre was accepted in principle, by the Government of Andhra 
Pradesh. The proposal is being pursued.” 


7.27 Explaining the difficulties in the removal of encroachments, 
the Quartermaster General, army headquarters stated during 
evidence: | 


‘Basically the mode of encroachment is a subject which is dealt with 
by the local Governments. In the present situation as it is, we really 
do not get any guidance or assistance to get the encroachments 
removed and therefore the question continues to remain, as it is at 
the moment.” 


7.28 In a note on the need for further administrative and legal measures 
required to prevent encroachments on defence land as promised during 
evidence, the Ministry of Defence have stated as follows 


‘Administrative vigilance to enclose and protect Government lands 
appears to be the basic pre-requisite for protecting defence land from 
encroachment. The cost of maintaining such vigilance would be very 
high. This is on account of the vast area comprising defence land 
especially in the form of ranges, training facilities etc. Enclosing such 
areas with perimeter walls, fences etc. or otherwise guarding them at all 
times will call for very sizeable investments. Within the limitations 
imposed by resources, vigorous efforts are made on a continuing basis to 
prevent encroachments on defence lands. Though the number of 
encroachments is rather large, the area affected (3715 acres) is a small 
proportion of the defence land holdings. The vigilance of the defence 
forces and the rest of the official machinery and the continuing efforts to 
remove encroachment account for the relatively moderate losses on 
account of encroachments as far as defence lands are concerned. 


(2) As far as further administrative steps for combating the menace of 
encroachment is concerned, these fall into two categories: preventive 
measures to thwart new encroachments and punitive steps to throw out 
unauthorised occupants from defence lands. In the first category, we 
already have a fairly vigilant and effective machinery for closely watching 
defence lands from encroachment. A totally foolproof system looks 
somewhat beyond our immediate capability on account of the substantial 


wt 


127 


additional costs on materials, equipment and manpower. Nevertheless, 
efforts would be made to identify specially vulnerable lands for social 
protective measures. Administrative instructions: would be issued to all 
concerned to identify areas which are prone to encroachment and to keep 
a special vigil in such areas. Administrative action would also be taken 
against officials whose negligence might be a contributory factor in 
permitting encroachment in the first place and for not pursuing timely/ 
effectively steps for getting existing encroachments vacated. 


(3) Removal of encroachers from defence land involves recourse to legal 
remedies. Presently, the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised 
Occupants) Act, 1971 is not applicable to properties of Cantt. Boards. A 
proposal has been made by the Ministry of Defence to amend the Act so 
as to make it applicable to the Cantt. Boards by inserting a sub-clause 
(4)2 Section 2(e), as under: 


...for any premises belonging to or taken on Jease by or on behalf of 
any Cantt. Board constitute under the Cantt. Act 1924 or placed 
under the management of or vested in any such Cantt. Board...’ 


The Ministry of Urban Development has been reminded to take further 
action to amend the relevant Act. Proposals have also been made to 
empower Estate Officers to requisition and secure Police assistance to 
enforce eviction of unauthorised occupants and to provide for adequate 
penalties to encroachers, to deter them from encroachment. 


(S) In the prevailing social and economic milieu in our country, removal 
of encroachments has been rendered difficult not so much on account of 
inadequacy in the prdvisions of law as the compelling public pressure on 
the authorities to refrain from eviction action. In most cases, removal of 
encroachment would call for provision of some alternative land to the 
encroachers for their resettlement/rehabilitation. Public authorities, 
especially the Ministry of Defence, find it hard to locate alternative land to 
resettle the encroacher nor is it practicable to find resources to acquire 
suitable land elsewhere to be offered to encroachers. In most cases where 
eviction action had been initiated, interventions on behalf of encroachers 
have stalled the proceedings for long periods of time, in some cases 
running into decades. In the long run, a combination of higher levels of 
vigilance against encroachments, more rigorous implementation of existing 
laws, certain modifications to the existing law to fill certain gaps and a 
climate of opinion in the country favouring effective measures against 
encroachment will be required to protect defence lands from the perils of 
encroachment.”’ 


Conclusion 


7.29 The Committee are informed that after assuming the possession of 
the land, the Estate Officers are required to carry out the work of erection 
of boundary pillars, preparation of plan on a suitable scale and drawing of 
a description of the boundaries of the land under rule 10 of the Rules for 


2146LS-19> 


128 


the Acquisition, Custody, Relinguishment etc. of Military Lands in India 
(A.C.R. Rules), 1944. On completion of the above process, a copy of plan 
and description of the boundaries of the land after verification by a local 
Committee consisting of Military authorities and Revenue Officer, 
accompanying the proceedings of the Committee, is also required to be 
forwarded to the Revenue Officer of the State Government for record. It 
has been admitted before the Committee by a representative of the Ministry 
that in a number of cases of acquisition these works are yet to be done. 


Recommendation 


7.3 As the verified land plan with boundary description is the 
elementary requirement for ownership proof of the land belonging to the 
Defence Services, the Committee recommend that work on the preparation 
and verification of boundaries of the remaining cases of land acquisition 
should be taken up and completed on priority basis. The Committee would 
also like to be apprised within six months of the progress achieved by the 
local Defence authorities in clearing the arrears in this regard. 


Conclusion 


7.31 The Committee are informed that the current strength of DEO’s 
establishment is based on the assessment of worked in 1968-70 conducted by 
the .staff Inspection Unit of the Ministry of Finance. The Committee are 
furtner apprised that the present staff strength of DEO is inadequate in 
view of present magnitude of land acquisition work including pursual of 
court cases. The Committee note that presently 10,300 Cases of litigation in 
District Courts, 1459 cases in High courts and 718 cases in the Supreme 
Court are stated to be pending. However, despite repeated requests, the 
Department of Expenditure have not ordered a fresh work study of DEO. 
The Committee also note that there is paucity of legally qualified staff in 
DEO to deal with court cases which has resulted in large number of 
Execution Petitions and Contempt of Court Proceedings for payment of 
enhanced compensation. The committee view this unfortunate development 
with deep concern. 


The Committee fully endorse the view of the Ministry of Defence that ‘for 
dedicated legal support on matter connected with compensation, it is 
desirable that at each Directorate and in the offices of DEOs having large 
number of Reference/Appeal cases, an officer of the Ministry of Law or the 
legal Department of the State Government, should be provided on 
deputation basis.’ 


Recommendation 


7.32 The Committee recommend that pending a detailed work-study by 
the Staff Inspection Unit of the Ministry. of Finance (Department of 
Expenditure), the Ministry of Defence should identify the additional staff 
requirements of the DEO on the basis of the analysis by Establishment 
Study Team and other cadre reviews and formulate specific proposals for 


129 


necessary financial sanctions. The Committee feel that already much time 
has been lost and situation has reached a sorry pass. They are of the strong 
view that there should be a no further delays in according necessary 
financial sanction for required additional staff. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government in the Ministry of Finance Should accord 
necessary financial sanction keeping in view specific needs of DEO and 
urgency deserved in the matter. The Committee may be apprised of the 
action taken in this regard. 


Conclusion 


7.33 The Committee feel that delegation of financial powers laid down in 
1962 for hiring and in 1978 for requisition and acquisition of immovable 
property and delegeted to the Joint Director, Director and the Director 
General have lost relevance in 1991 because of the escalations that have 
taken place in the cost of lands and buildings and the consequential 
increases in the elements of compensation and rent. 


Recommendation 


7.34 The Committee are of the view that a review of delegation of 
financial powers to officers of DEO establishment is overdue and therefore, 
desire that such a review be conducted expeditiously in regard to powers 
vesting at different levels in regard to all matters of requisitioning and 
acquisition of properties both under RAIP Act and LA Act. The Committee 
consider a simultaneous corresponding enhancement in financial powers 
delegated to Formation Commanders, in the matter of hiring of immovable 
properties, is also warranted keeping in view the inflationary impact. 


Conclusions 


7.35 The Committee note with concern that encroachments on Defence 
Land have been increasing year after year. According to the Ministry of 
Defence the number of encroachments on Defence Land under’ the 
management of DEO/CEO have increased from 15392 in December, 1980 to 
29188 in Jahuary, 1990 covering an area of 3715 acres. During 1989 itself 
1986 encroachments covering an area of 209 acres were detected by 
Ministry of Defence. Even as old encroachments are removed, new 
encroachments continue to take place. Consequently, the total number of 
encroachments as well as the land covered thereunder goes on increasing 
from year to year. 

According to the Ministry of Defence, the area of defence land under 
unauthorised occupation (3715 acres) is a small proportion of the total 
Defence land holdings. The Committee, however feel that loss of even a few 
acres of prime land in metropolitan city like Bombay is a matter for 
concern as land requirements of Ministry of Defence are increasing and 
alternative vacant land is not easily available. 


7.36 The Committee are apprised that in general encroachments on 
public land are a result of growing pressure of population in urban areas as 


130 


more and more labour migrants from rural areas to metropolitan cities, 
industrial towns and Cantonments. Moreover, socio-political environment in 
the country is also responsible for large scale encroachments on public 
lands. However, in regard to Defence lands, there are certain special 
reasons which explain the proneness of Defence land to unauthorised 
occupation. Firstly, the Ministry of Defence being an absentee landlord have 
no meaningful presence in case of temporarily surplus Defence land, 
camping grounds, abandoned airfields. Secondly, these lands are mostly 
unfenced and scattered. The other factors contributing to this situation are 
lack of administrative vigilance at the stage of encroachment, limited 
resources and inadequate manpower in keeping watch and ward, and 
organise colonisation as well as social resistance to eviction, The Committee 
have also been informed about the difficulties countered in prevention as 
well as removal of encroachment on Defence land due to non-cooperation of 
police/State law enforcing authorities, frequent intervention by the Courts 
on the side of encroachers and the inability of Ministry of Defence in 
arranging alternative rehabilitation of the encroachers before their eviction, 
which is mandatory under the policy followed by various State 
Governments. The Committee also note that specific laws have been enacted 
in the States protecting the interests of encroachers vis-a-vis authorities 
seeking to evict them from public lands. 


7.37 The Committee note that in order to prevent encroachments, 
imstructions exist for identification of land prone to encroachments in 
Cantonments, fencing of area under encroachment to contain fresh 
encroachments, afforestation of vacant strips of land in Cantonments, 
annual inspection of land by DEOs and deputing of a squad of officials of 
DEOs for detection and removal of new encroachments onlands under their 
management in the Cantonments. 


7.38 The Committee are concerned to note that encroachments on 
Defence land are on the increase even though legal provisions have been 
made for treating unlawful occupation of public premises as a cognizable 
offence and even tholgh powers have been given to the Estate Officer to file 
an FIR for arrest of the encroachers in a repeat case. The Committee have 
a feeling that the Ministry of Defence have not been paying adequate 
attention to prevention and removal of encroachments on Defence lands. 
Moreover the view of the Committee that all these years management in 
Defence land has been accorded low priority over the years, gains strength 
from this state of affairs. 


Recommendation 


7.39 In the opinion of the Committee the proposal of the Ministry of 
‘Defence to empower Estate Officers to requisition and secure potice 
assistance for eviction of unauthorised occupants and to provide adequate 
penalties for encroachers, merit favourable consideration by the Ministry of 
Urban Development. The Committee also desire the Ministry of Urban 


131 


Development to finalise early, the proposal of the Ministry of Defence to 
extend the provisions of Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised 
Occupants) Act, 1971 to Cantonment Boards. 
Conclusion 

7.40 The Committee are informed that in October, 1985, the Ministry of 
Defence issued instructions to the effect that if certain encroachments on 
lands not in active occupation of Services cannot be removed, a review 
should be carried out Cantonment-wise, by a team of officers as to which 
encroachments should be cleared and which may be regularised. However, 
so far no definite proposal on these lines has been submitted to 
Government, except in case of Secunderabad Cantonment. While the 
Committee welcome the realistic approach adopted by the Ministry in this 
regard they regret to observe that there has been no follow-up action. 


Recommendation 


The Committee desire the Ministry of Defence to examine the legal and 
other implications of instructions issued for regularisation of encroachments 
on Defence lands not in active use of Services in the light of different State 
Laws in operation for the welfare of encroachers and also keeping in view 
the principle of equity which enjoins upon the Government to follow 
uniform approach throughout the country. 


CHAPTER VIII 
LAWS GOVERNING LAND ACQUISITION 


8.1 The following legislations are being invoked for acquiring land for 
Defence purposes: 

(i) The Land Acquisition Act, 1894, 

(ii) The Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 
1952, 

(iii) Jammu & Kashmir Land Acquisition Act, 1990, 

(iv) Jammu & Kashmir Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable 
Property Act, 1968, 

(v) If the proposal for acquisition of land involves forest land, the 
Clearance of the Ministry of Environment and Forests is necessary, 
as per the provisions of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, for 
diversion of forest land for rion-forest purposes. 


8.2 The Ministry stated that in the past recourse was also taken to the 
following laws for the acquisition of land: 


(i) The Defence of India Act, 1939 (DI Act, 1939) 
(ii) The Defence of India Act, 1962 (DI Act 1962) ~ 
(iii) The Defence of India Act, 1971 (DI Act, 1971) 
(iv) The Rajasthan Land Acquisition Act, 1953 (Rajasthan LA Act, 
1953). 
8.3 The DI Acts became inoperative with their repeal. The Rajasthan 


LA Act, 1953 became inoperative from the 18 January, 1987, when it was 
substituted with the Central LA Acct. 


8.4 Following is the list of some Central Laws for acquisition of land for 
special purposes in the country furnished by the Department.of Rural 
Development: 

1. The Coal-Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 
1957. 

2. The Land Acquisition (Mines) Act, 1885. 

3. The Government of India Act, 1935. 

4. The Defence of India Act, 1939. 

5. The Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 
1952. 

6. The Defence of India Act, 1971 (Later Defence of India and 
Internal Security of India Act, 1971). 

7. The Petroleum and Minerals Pipelines (Acquisition of right of user 
in Land) Act, 1962. 


132 


133 


. The Indian Railways Act, 1890. 

. The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885. 

. The Indian Works of Defence Act, 1903. 

. The Indian Electricity Act, 1910 

. The Indian Tramways Act, 1886 

. The Resettlement of Displaced Persons (Land Acquisition Act, 


1948. 


. The Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1956. 
. The Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976. 
. The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains 


Act, 1959. 


. The Atomic Energy Act, 1962. 

. The Cantonment Act, 1924. 

. The Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948. 

. The Indian Forest Act, 1927. 

. The Metro Railways (Construction of Works) Act, 1978. 
. The States Re-organisation Act, 1956. 

. The Ancient Monuments Preservation Act, 1904. 


8.5 The due process of law for dispossession of land, for awarding and 


disbursement of compensation, and the judicial reliefs available to the 
aggrieved/dispossessed persons are thus variable under the different laws. 
In the context of such a large number of statutes governing acquisitian of 
land and keeping in view the requirements of equity, the Committee 
enquired whether principles governing award of compensation should not 
be the same throughout the country and whether the Department of Rural 
Development favoured to at least have one single Central law to govern 
acquisition of immovable property in place of the present two statutes, viz. 
Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and RAIP Act, 1952. The Department replied: 


“The Department fully and strongly supports the view that there 
should be one single statute to govern acquisition of land/property 
in the entire country so that land losers receive similar treatment. 
Besides the L.A. Act, 1894, there is not only RAIP Act, 1952 but 
there are a large number of other Central and State laws in 
operation which have provisions with He ard to procedure of 
acquisition and norms of compensation as less favourable than 
those of L.A. Act, 1894. In some States, there are as many as five 
different laws for acquisition of land. This creates immense 
confusion among the land losers and causes hardship to them. 
Accordingly, the Department has been impressing upon the 
Central Ministries/States from time to time cither to repeal their 
laws which provide for acquisition of land or amend them so as to, 


134 


bring them in line with the Land Acquisition Act,‘ 1894, as 
amended, which reflects the national policy on acquisition of land 
in the country. This is all the more necessary because after 
amendment of the Act in 1984. The scope of ‘‘public purpose”’ has 
been considerably elaborated and as such practically all categories 
of acquisitions for whatever public purpose can be covered within 
its ambit. Therefore, there is no rationale at all for having 
multiplicity of laws for acquisition of land for public purpose. In 
the consensus arrived at in the Land Acquisition Conference held 
in July, 1989 State and Central Agencies were urged to repeal/ 
carry out the desired changes in their acquisition laws in line with 
the amended Land Acquisition Act, 1894 positively within a period 
of one year failing which the Central Govt. may consider making a 
legal provision in the L.A. Act to the effect that its provisions will. 
prevail over other laws on the subject. 


The Department, therefore, strongly feels that multiplicity of 
acquisition laws work to the detriment of affected land holders and 
a single acquisition law would serve their interests better.”’ 


8.6 Explaining the constitutional position during evidence, the Secretary 
of the Deptt. of Legal Affairs stated: “The subject matter of this 
legislation figures in the Concurrent List which means the Union 
Government cannot prevent the States from making their own. laws. 


The Union law shall prevail where the State law is repugnant to it. If the 
President assents to a State law which has been reserved for his 
consideration, it will prevail notwithstanding its repugnancy to an earlier 
law of the Union.” 


8.7 Explaining the objectives of the Land Acquisition Act and the RAIP 
Act, the Secretary of the Department of Legal Affairs stated: 


“The Land Acquisition Act is an Act which can be operated both 
for the purposes of the Union and State purposes. The Central 
enactment of 1952 is only for the requisitioning and acquisition of 
immovable properties for the purposes of the Union. So, there is 
no way that we can blend these two in their present form. We can 
examine these acts and see whether we can really combine these 
two. 


On the face of it, one Act is for the purposes of the Union and 
the other is for any public purpose. They occupy two: different 
fields. Apart from this, these are seven or eight basic differences 
between: the two Acts. (See Annexure).” 


ANNEXURE 
(See para 8.7 of the Report) 


A perusal of the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (herein 
after referred to as the “1894 Act’’) and the Requisitioning and 
Acquisition of immovable Property Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as 
the “1952 Act’’) suggests, broadly, the following points of differences 
between the two Acts, as indicated in a note furnished by the Ministry of 
Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs to the Committee: 


(1) Both the 1894 Act and the 1952 Act are relatable to Entry 42 of 
List I1I-Concurrent List-of the Constitution. The 1894 Act can, 
however, be amended by the States also. A number of States 
have come up with such amendments to the said Act. The 1952 
Act can only be amended by the Centre. 


(2) The 1894 Act deals basically with acquisition of ‘land’ defined in 
Section 3(a) thereof. The 1952 Act deals with requisitioning as 
well as acquisition of ‘property’ defined in Section 2(g) thereof. 


(3) Acquisition under the 1894 Act can be by both the Central and 
the State Governments. Acquisition under the 1952 Act is only 
by the Central Government. 


(4) Under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, land can be acquired for 
a public purpose which has been inclusively defined in Section 
3(f) thereof. There are also provisions for acquiring land for 
companies. 


Under the 1952 Act, an immovable property can be acquired 
for a public purpose, but the said purpose is only restricted to 
the purpose of the Union under Section 3(1) thereof. 


(5) Part VI of the 1894 Act deals with temporary occupation of 
land. Section 35(1) thereof provides for temporary occupation of 
waste or arable land for a period not exceeding three years. 


Under the 1952 Act, an immovable property can be 
requisitioned for a period not exceeding 17 years from the date 
of taking possession of such property. 

(6) A temporarily occupied waste or arable land under Section 
36(2) of the 1894 Act, can be acquired if the same has become 
unfit to be used for the purpose for which it was immediately 
used before such temporary occupation and if the person 
interested in such land so requires. 


Under Section 7(3) (a) and (b) of the 1952 Act, a 
135 


2146LS8-20 


136 


requisitioned property can be acquired if works have been 
constructed thereon during the period of requisition at the 
expense of the Central Government, and the said Government 
decides that the value of or the right to use such works should 
be secured or preserved for purposes of the Government, or if 
the cost of restoring the immovable property to its condition at 
the time of requisition would, in the determination of the 
Central Government, be excessive and the owner thereof 
declines to accept the release of such property without payment 
of compensation for such restoration. 


(7) The machinery for enforcement of the two Acts is also different. 
Under the 1894 Act, powers have been delegated by the Central 
Government to the State Governments under Article 258(1) of 
the Constitution to exercise functions under all the Sections of 
the said Act, except Section 55(1) thereof. Accordingly, the 
State Governments are the “appropriate Governments” by _ 
virtue of such delegation within the meaning of the term used in 
various Sections of the said Act. Sections 4(1), 6(1) and 8 to 17 
of the said Act, refer. Also, it is the State Government and its 
officers such as Land Acquisition Collectors, who conduct the 
proceedings, to acquire lands under the said Act. An award is 
passed by such Land Acquisition Collectors in the proceedings. 


Under the 1952 Act, powers to requisition an immovable 
property are exercisable by the competent authority which is a 
person or authority authorised by the Central Government by 
notification to perform such functions under the said Act. The 
power to acquire the property is exercisable by the Central 
Government itself. Sections 3(1) and 7(1) of the said Act refer. 
However, under the 1952 Act, compensation for the 
requisitioned property or the property acquired is either settled 
through an agreement between the owner and the Central 
Government or determined by an arbitrator appointed by the 
Central Government in accordance with the provisions of 
Section 8 of the said Act. 


(8) The procedure of challenging the award and filing appeal is also 
different under the two Acts. 


Under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, the award of the 
Collector is challengeable at the instance of an aggrieved person 
by a reference to court under Section 18(1) of the said Act. 
When the court has passed a judgement, an appeal lies under 
Section 54 of the Act, to the High Court, subject to the 
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 applicable to 
appeals from original decrees. A subsequent appeal also lies to 
the Supreme Court, subject to the provisions contained in 


137 


Section 110 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and in Order 
XLV thereof. 


Under the 1952 Act, an order of requisitioning passed by the 
competent authority under Section 3(2) can be appealed before 
the Central Government, vide Section 10(1) thereof. 


From an award of the arbitrator under Section 8, determining 
compensation, an appeal lies to the High Court, within whose 
jurisdiction the immovable property is situate. 


(9) There is also difference in respect of the compensation rigime 
under the two Acts. 


Under the 1894 Act, compensation payable for an acquired 
land is the market value of the land at the date of publication of 
notification under Section 4(1). 


Under the 1952 Act, compensation for acquisition of 
immovable property is ‘just’ compensation on the date of 
acquisition. Such compensation is determinable having regard to 
the circumstances of each case and provisions of sub-section (3) 
of Section 8. Sub-section (3) of Section 8 provides that 
compensation payable for any property so acquired shall be the 
price which the requisitioned property would have fetched in the 
local market if it had remained in the same condition as it was 
at the time of requisitioning and been sold on the date of 
acquisition. 

(10) Under Section 23(1A) of the 1894 Act, an amount at 12% per 
annum is payable on the market value of the land from the 
date of publication of notification under Section 4(1) to the 
date of award of the Collector or the date of taking possession, 
whichever is earlier. 


Under the 1952 Act, the property js already requisitioned 
and required in such a State, the compensation being payable 
as on the date of acquisition. No such provision in the Act of 
1894 exists. 


(11) The 1894 Act provides for the payment of solatium at the rate 
of 30% of the market value of the land in consideration of the 
compulsory nature of acquisition, vide Section 23(2). 


Under the 1952 Act, there is no express provision for the 
payment of solatium. 


(12) The 1894 Act provides for payment of interest at the rate of 
9% per annum on the amount of compensation from the date 
of taking possession till it is so paid or deposited with the 
Collector. If it is not paid or deposited within one year from 
the date of taking possession, then further interest at the rate 


138 


of 15% per annum on the amount of compensation is payable 
till it is paid or deposited with-the Collector (Section 34). 


There is no express provision in the 1952 Act regarding 
payment of interest. 


The question as to whether the features of the two Acts can 
be combined in a single Act, in so far as the Central 
Government is concerned, is a matter of public policy, the 
Ministry of Law and Justice avers. 


(13) The 1894 Act also provides for interest @ 9% per annum for 
the first year and 15% per annum for the period thereafter on 
the amount of compensation awarded by the Court in excess of 
that awarded by the Collector from the date of taking 
possession of the land till and date of payment of such excess 
compensation into Court (Section 28). 


8.8 In this context, the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Defence stated: 


“It is desirable to have only one law. Today, the RAIP Act has 
served certain useful purposes. If there is an enabling provision in 
the Land Acquisition Act which enables the Defence Ministry to 
hold land on temporary basis that is good. But it has got a ceiling 
of three years now. We are of the view that only one law would 
suffice.” 


a, 


8.9 The Secretary, Department of Rural Development, stated: 


“There should be uniformity in the legislation in regard to the 
acquisition of land.” 


8.10 The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development stated: 


“We do feel that there are situations in which land is required for 
temporary periods and that purpose can be served if there is a 
specific legislation for requsition athority. How long it can remain 
under requisition and thereafter it will be acquired or not are 
separate matters. We feel that in all the situations particularly 
where requisition is involved the Land Acquisition Act will not 
serve the purpose of the RAIP Act.” 


8.11 The representative further stated: 


“As far as requisition is concerned we do feel that a specific Act 
for requisition is necessary. 


About acquisiton, one could take other position. I think that if 
there is a specific provision for requisition in the Act it may serve 
the purpose.” 

8.12 Dwelling on the question further the Director General, Defence 
Estate in the Ministry of Defence stated during evidence: 


139 


“We would welcome a single Act. 


Coming to the question of requisitioning, we welcome 
incorporation of an appropriate prqvision. As it stands now, it 
provides for a temporary occupation. During the course of defence 
occupation, it may be necessary for them to occupy certain sites 
and it may also be necessary for us to hold on to that site for some 
period. If we bring a provision under the LA Act, we can provide 
for a temporary occupation. It is there is the RAIP Act and it can 
be done here also. The principles of compensation which is there 
in the LA Act are used for the purpose of Union only as far as we 
are concerned. There should be no problem in adopting that.” 


8.13 He further stated: 


“LA Act was created in 1894. As a provincial Government, the 
Government was taking decision on acquisition at that time. After 
the Constitution came into force in 1950, when it became a 
Concurrent subject by an adoptation order, a new Clause was 
added as ‘appropriate Government’ and the word ‘provinicial 
Government’ was deleted. After that diarchy system came. The 
Central Government has by a Presidential Notification under 
Article 258 authorised the State Government to exercise those 
powers. Even in respect of RAIP Act also the Central 
Government has got the power but by a notification powers have 
been vested in the state functionaries. The source is again Article 
258. So, bringing a single Act will not be a problem.” 


8.14 The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development, stated: 


“We would also welcome. As far as the requisition of property is 
concerned, after de-requisition whenever it 1s being acquiried, it is 
being done under the Land Acquisition Act only. It may be even 
requisitioned under RAIP Act. If there is only one Act we would 
welcome it.” 


8.15 The Secretary, Department of Rural Development, stated: 
“We are also for a common single legislation.” 


8.16 In response to a query, the representative informed the Committee 
that the Department of Rural Development was not requisitioning 
agricultural land. 

। 


8.17 In the context of preceding discussion, the Committee enquired 
what was the functioning of a nodal Ministry, the Secretary, Department 
of Legal Affairs stated: 


“A nodal ministry in respect of any subject is one to whom the 
subject is allocated under the Government of India (Allocation of 
Business) Rules for transacting the business of the Government. 
Any problem relating to that subject would have to be referred to 


140 


that nodal Ministry. Unless that power is delegated to some other 
Ministry, the nodal Ministry also issues the notifications, if any, 
under the Act on the subject.” 


8.18 Asked why there ought to be a nodal Ministry for the acquisition 
and requisition of properties, the Secretary of Department of Legal Affairs 
stated: 


“In so far as the Land Acquisition Act is concerned, this has to be 
assigned to some Ministry or the other. Since matters relating to 
acquisition of land for purposes of the Union have been allocated to 
the Department of Rural Development, that Department is 
considered appropriate to handle this Act.” 


8.19 In this context of the RAIP Act, Additional Secretary, Ministry of 
Urban Development informed that: 


“At that time (when RAIP Act was enacted) the Ministry of Works 
and Housing was there mainly for the purpose of office building or 
residential building. That must be the reason why it was made the 
nodal Ministry. However in 1985, the Ministry of Defence acquired 
about 8000 acres of land. (while) Only 25 acres of land was acquired 
for Postal and Telecommunications. All other cases related only to 
building for office and residential purpose. That may be the reason 
why Ministry of Works and Housing was the nodal Ministry.” 


8.20 In regard to operation of the RAIP Act, the Additional Secretary, 
informed the Committee: 


“Its operation has been decentralised. It is not operated by our 
Ministry. In 1985, an amendment was proposed to the Cabinet that 
prior approval of our Ministry may be taken. But that was not 
approved by the Cabinet. As a resylt it is being operated 
independently by the various Ministries.” 


8.21 Commenting upon the reference of the concept of nodal Ministry in 
the context of RAIP Act, the Additional Secretary stated: 


At the moment, it is not serving much purpose.” 


8.22 Expressive views of the Government on having uniform pattern for 
Land Acquisition’. throughout the Union and the States, the Ministry of 
Agriculture (Department of Rural Development) in a note furnished after 
evidence have stated: 7 


“This objective can be served only if acquisition of land, whether for 
Central or State Projects, is done throughout the country under and 
in accordance with the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. 
In this background soon after the L.A. Act, 1894 was amended in 
1984, it was impressed upon the State Govts. and Central 
Departments to bring their laws dealing with acquisition of land in 


141 


line with the amended L.A. Act, 1894. The consensus in the Land 
Acquisition Conference held in July, 1989 was also that land should 
be acquired under the L.A. Act, 1894 as amended in 1984 as its 
provisions reflect the national policy on acquisition of land jn the 
country. Accordingly, it was also recommended that the laws on land 
acquisition which deviate from L.A. Act should either be replead or 
brought in line with the amended L.A. Act within one year failing 
which the Central Govt. may consider making legal provisions in the 
L.A. Act to the effect that its provisions will prevail over other laws 
on the subject. The relevant portion of the consensus arrived at in 
this Conference is extracted below:— 


(1) The operation of a large number of laws on land acquisition within 


(2 


we 


the same area having different procedures and norms of 
compensation create enormous. confusion and hardship to the 
affected land owners. Different land acquisition laws for different 
public purposes also stand in the way of efficient and expeditious 
acquisition of land. After the amendment to the Land Acquisition 
Act carried out in 1984, the scope of public purpose has been 
considerably elaborated and practically all acquisitions including 
those for Companies can be covered within its ambit. Covering 
specific public purpose/public purposes is not considered necessary. 
Rather efforts are necessary to repeal the existing laws and make 
Land Acquisition Act, 1894 applicable to all such acquisitions of 
land which can be adequately covered by its provisions. 


A large number of laws on acquisition of land enacted by the Stave/ 
Central agencies having different and more unfavourable provisions 
both regarding procedure of acquisition as well .as norms of 
compensation etc. than those laid down in the Land Acquisition Act 
as amended in 1984, still exist.. Despite the consensus arrived at in 
the Conference of Revenue Secretaries in 1984, the concerned State 
Governments/Central Departments have neither repealed these laws 
nor brought them in line with the more liberal provisions made in 
the Land Acquisition Act as amended in 1984. The continued 
operation of these laws without necessary changes adversely affects 
the interest of land losers, generates avoidable resentment in their 
mind and affect smooth acquisition of land. The concerned State and 
Central Agencies may repeal/carry out the desired changes in line 
with the amended Land Acquisition Act, 1894 positively within a 
period one year failing which the Central Government may consider 
making legal provisions in the Land Acquisition Act to the effect 
that its provisions will prevail over other laws on the subject. 


(3) The amendment carried out in the Land Acquisition Act in 1984 


represents the national policy on acquisition of land which 
harmonises the interest of the State with those of the land losers. 


142 


There is no reason why affected land losers in some parts of the 
country should suffer on account of unfavourable provisions of other 
land acquisition laws made applicable to them. Such a situation is 
positively discriminatory to them and defeats the objective of the 
national policy and the mandate of the National Parliament.” 


Conclusion 


8.23 The Committee note that the subject matter ‘Land Acquisition’ 
figures in the Concurrent List of the Constitution, which means that both 
Parliament and the Legislature of any of the States have the authority to 
make laws on the subject. 


The Committee further note that the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 an Act 
which can be operated both for purposes of the Union and the State 
purposes. The 1894 Act, can, however, be amended by the States also. The 
RAIP Act, 1952 is only for requisitioning and acquisition of immovable 
properties for the public purposes of the Union. The 1952 Act can only be 
amended by the Centre. However, the Committee are informed by Ministry 
of Law and Justice that question of combining the two Statutes can be 
examined even though there are seven or eight basic differences between the 
two. 


The Commiittee are surprised that even though the Land Acquisition Act, 
1894 can be operated for the purposes of the Union as well as the States, 
there is, apart from the RAIP Act, 1952, a plethora of other Central and 
State Laws in operation having varying provisions regarding procedure for 
acquisition, time limits for completion of acquisition, principles for 
determination and disbursement of compensation, amount for damages, and 
opportunities for judicial reliefs to the aggrieved /dispossessed persons, thus 
creating woeful confusion among the unlettered land losers. According to 
the Ministry of Rural Development the Land Acquisition Act 1894 have 
provisions with norms of compensation more favourable than those available 
in other Central and State Laws in operation. The Committee are apprised 
that as per the Land Acquisition Conference held in July, 1989, the State 
and Central agencies were urged to repeal/carry out the desired changes in 
their acquisition laws in line with the amended Land Acquisition Act 
positively within a period of one year failing which the Central Government 
might consider making legal provisions in the Land Acquisition Act to the 
effect that its provisions will prevail over other laws on the subject. They 
also find that both Ministry of Defence as well as Ministry of Urban 
Development favour introduction of unified law on the subject. 


Recommendation 


8.24 The Committee recommend that the Ministry of Rural Development 
should undertake the task of enacting a common law on the subject of 
requisition and acquisition of land by the Union as well as 


143 


States. However before drafting a Bill for this purpose the Committee 
would expect the Ministry to first undertake an indepth and through study 
of the various Central and States/Union Territories. Laws and closely 
interact with the concerned agencies with a view to finding out those 
features regarding procedure of acquisition, time limits for completion of 
acquisition proceedings, realistic market value of land, principles.of 
compensation, speedy disbursement, opportunities for judicial rehets tg © 
the aggrieved, statutory provision for rehabilitation grant, resettlement 
policy and preference in means of livelihood i.e. in employment 
opportunities, allotment of commercial plots/space etc. and special 
provisions for lands in tribal areas where transactions of land have not 
been recorded properly, whch are most favourable and advantageous to 
the land loser, whereafter such features as are beneficial to the citizen can 
be blended for drafting a single unified legislation for the purposes of 
requisitioning and acquisition of immovable property for the Union as well 
as States/Union Territories. 


QIYELS=2 


CHAPTER IX 
-REHAGILITATION GRANTS/RESETTLEMENT SCHEMES 


9.1 The Committee have been informed that in recent years, in addition 
to compensation, the Ministry of Defence have been called upon to pay 
large “rehabilitaion” grants, considering the facts of the acquisition case. 
In some cases the Ministry have sanctioned grants based on the mandatory 
Schemes prepared by the concerned State Government. In some cases 
lump sum amounts have been paid to each affected family. The Ministry 
have no guidelines for sanctioning rehabilitation grants as the same relate 
to the area being acquired, the density of population thereon, the nature 
of economic activity being carried out by the displaced persons, the 
quantums of compensation they would receive from the State Government 
etc. The rehabilitation grant is handed over‘to the Collector. 


~ 


9.2 There is no Central legislation making a statutory provision for the 
allocation of ‘“‘rehabilitation”’ grants to the tennants/owners whose lands 
are acquired for meeting Defence requirements. 


9.3. Enquired how the quantum of ‘rehabilitation grants’ was determined 
and the role of the Ministry, both in the determination and disbursement 
of such grants, the Ministry of Defence in a note to the Committee stated: 


“Certain State Governments have laid down norms for renabilitaion. Fo 
example, Maharashtra Government has created an entitlement of an 
area of 2000 sq. ft. according to the rules made under the 
Resettlement Act 1976, for each displaced family unit. To provide 
this useable land, additional land for facilities like roads, drains, open 
spaces etc. are required. Civic and other amenities also have to be 
provided at the resettlement colonics. Loans for building houses are 
also given. The MP Government has got the MADHYA PRADESH 
PARIYOJANA KE KARAN  VISTHAPIT £VYAKATI 
(PUNASTHAPAN) ADHINIYAM (MP ACT NO. 10) of 1985. The 
Ministry of Environment has issued certain guidelines for relief and 
rehabilitation in respect of persons affected by acquisition of lands for 
Irrigation and Hydro-electric projects on the lines of those issued by 
the Department of Energy.” 


9.4 The Department of Industrial Development (Bureau of Public 
Enterprises) have also issued certain guidelines on the relief and 
rehabilitation. measures when lands are acquired to set up industrial 
undertaking 


144 


145 


9.5 According to the Ministry of Defence the affected people in a State 
expect uniform treatment from the State Government irrespective of the 
Agency/Department for whom their lands are being acquired. However, 
there are variations in the approaches followed by the various States. Even 
within the same State, the State Government may have adopted different 
approaches at various points of time. For example in Madhya Pradesh, 
when lands were acquired in Gwalior Morena during 1984-87 a given scale 
of relief measures was adopted. In 1986-87 a higher level of rehabilitation 
measures were demanded by the MP Government for the Beircha ranges. 


Later, when lands were acquired in the same district (Indore) for Hema 
ranges still higher scales of relief were demanded. 


The relief and rehabilitation demanded, for the sites to be taken at 
Baliapal in Orissa for the National Test Range and the extension of 
Interim Test Range are considerably higher than what was provided when 
‘land was acquired for the ADGM School and Centre at Gopalpur-on-Sea, 
a small amount for re-housing the fishermen families. Liberal relief was 
given for the people affected by acquisition of land in Karwar for Navy. In 
this, the Government recognised the fact that Karnataka Government was 
giving State Government land free for the Scheme. 


9.6 The Ministry of Defence informed the Committee that they have a 
say in the determination of the rehabilitation grant in as much as what is 
placed at the disposal of the State Government is as agreed to between the 
Centre and the State. The State Governments normally tend to be very 
liberal, specially if they are not to share the burden. The Ministry of 
Defence has no role in the disbursement of the grant or in monitoring the 
use of the grant. 


9.7 Details of the rehabilitation grants sanctioned so far by the 
Government are the following: 


(1) F.F.R. Mahajan, Bikaner —Rs. 89.54 lakhs 
(2) Sea Bird, Karwar —Rs. 735.60 lakhs 
(3) Bircha F.F.R —Rs. 298.80 lakhs 
(4) Hema F.F.R. —Rs. 320:00 lakhs 
(5) Vajra Project (Gwalior) — —Rs. 10.00 lakhs 
(6) Ahire Village Khadakvasla —Rs. 47.49 lakhs 
(7) Deesa Air Field —Rs. 14.20 lakhs 


9.8 The Ministry of Defence stated that they can play only such role, 
statutorily, as may be provided in the L.A. Act. In this context, 
appropriate modification of the Act would have to be considered by the 
concerned Ministry in consultation with all related departments. 


146 


9.9, Expressing their views on payment of ‘rehabilitation’ grants in 
addition to payment of compensation without any statutory provisions to 
that effect, the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Rural 
Development) stated: 


“Even though the Central Government does not have any legislation 
in the matter of rehabilitation of the persons whose lands have been 
acquired, some State Governments have enacted legislation in this 
regard. The case of Maharashtra’s Resettlement of the Project Affected 
Persons Act is cited in this regard. 


It would be agreed that when land is acquired compulsorily, people 
are uprooted from their habitat and their livelihood is disrupted. They 
are not in a position to find alternative means of livelihood. In view of 
the growing number of such persons, there is a strong demand from 
various quarters that persons so displaced should be rehabilitated 
economically and socially. The Department of Rural Development 

‘fully supports this demand. It is only appropriate that the cost of 
rehabilitationn should be borne by the agency for whom land has been 
acquired and this cost should form part of the project for which land 
has been acquired. Resettlement of displaced persons is as much a 
public purpose as the acquisition of land. 


The department, therefore, is of the view that a comprehensive 
rehabilitation package should be evolved by the Central Government 
for displaced persons and a separate and comprehensive law on 
rehabilitation of displaced persons should be enacted.”’ 


9.10 During evidence before the Committee, the Secretary, Department 
of Rural Development stated: 


‘In the interest of the displaced persons there should be a 
rehabilitation policy for the whole nation. Actually the Ministry of 
Welfare is working out a rehabilitation policy for tribals and the 
Bureau of Public Enterprises is looking into the industrial 
undertakings, more specifically the Coal Mines. The Forest and 
Environment Ministry is also working out a policy paper.” 


9.11 In reply to query, the Director General, Defence Estates informed: 


“We don’t have a rehabilitation scheme. We only have to go by the 
demand. We ourselves don't make rehabilitation.” 


9.12 Asked to the State their view on the need for a comprehensive Act 
for rehabilitation of displaced persons, the Additional Secretary, Ministry 
of Urban Development stated: 


“We will agree to it.” 


9.13 Reiterating their stand for statutory provisions a uniform policy to 
protect the interest of displaced persons, the Ministry of Urban 


147 


Development/Rural Development, in separate notes furnished after 
evidence have stated: 


Ministry of Urban Development 


“In so far as rehabilitation grant and resettlement policy is 
concerned, it is necessary that certain central policy in this regard 
is enunciated to protect the interest of displaced persons: 
particularly those affected by large scale acquisitions. Certain 
sectoral policy like in the coal sector or for irrigation projects has 
been drawn up but it is necessary that certain uniformity in this 
regard is worked out and a policy enunciated.”’ 


Ministry of Rural Development 


“The Deptt. of Rural Development considers a separate and 
comprehensive legislation on rehabilitation of persons affected by 
acquisition of land necessary for protecting their interest. If the 
resettlement or rehabilitation grant is made available to the 
displaced persons as per the provisions of State laws/rules, there is 
likely to be no uniformity and the rehabilitation provisions may 
differ from State to State and may be less favourable in some 
States while being liberal in others. States may be inclined to 
justify a conservative scale of rehabilitation on account of financial 
constraints. Therefore, in order to avoid any disparity in this 
tegard and to ensure that the affected persons irrespective of their 
location get adequate facilities for their proper rehabilitation at 
uniform scale, it would be desirable to have a Central law through 
which alone national norms can be enforced.” 


9.14 The Committee note that in addition to payment of compensation as 
per provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, for the land acquired for 
Defence purposes, the Ministry of Defence have been called upon to pay 
‘rehabilitation’ grants on varying patterns and in some cases on basis of 
mandatory schemes prepared by the concerned State Governments. In this 
connection, the Committee are informed that some Ministries and 
Departments of the Government. of India have already laid down separate 
guidelines for relief and rehabilitation of persons affected by large scale 
acquisition on account of location of developmental projects. However, in 
the absence of any uniform norms in this regard, the concerned Ministry / 
Department adopt wherever necessary relief and rehabilitation measures on 
the basis of guidelines laid down by another Ministry for working out a 
rehabilitation package for displaced persons. In the case of Ministry of 
Defence rehabilitation grants have been made as determined by the State 
Governments in consultation with the Ministry. However, the Committee 
find that there aye variations in the rehabilitation provisions followed by 
various States. Even within the same State, different scales of relief have 
been demanded for acquisition of lands in respect of different projects. 


148 


The Committee feel deeply concerned over the lack of statutory 
resettlement measures and dis-uniformity in approach towards alleviation of 


hardships faced by the dispossessed persons following acquisition of their 
lands. 


9.15 In order to obviate the existing disparities in the relief and 
rehabilitation measures for persons affected by large scale acquisition of 
land for projects and ensure resettlement of affected persons in appropriate 
manner on an equitous basis, the Committee recommend that there should 
be a proper rehabilitation policy for the whole of country. They, 
accordingly, urge the Government to have immediate consultations with the 


States with the objective of enacting an independant and comprehensive 
Central law in the matter. 


New DELHI; MANORANJAN BHAKTA 


March 5, 1992 Chaigman, 
Estimates Committee. 


Phalguna 15, 1913 (Saka) 


APPENDIX I 


LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE ESTIMATES 
COMMITTEE (1990-91) 


Chairman 
Shri Jaswant Singh 


Members 


2 Shri J. P. Agarwal 

3 जा Anbarasee Era 

4 Shri Kamal Chaudhry 

5. Shri Anantrao Deshmukh 

6. Prof. Prem Kumar Dhumal 

7 Shri Balvant Manvar 

8 Shri Hannan Mollah 

9 Shri Arvind Netam 

10. Dr. Debi Prasad Pal 

11. Shri Rupchand Pal 

12. Shri Harin Pathak 

13. Shri Bhausaheb Pundlik Phundkar 
14. छा. Vijaya Kumara Raju 

15. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran 
16. Shri Y. Ramakrishna 

17. Shri Rameshwar Prasad 

18. Shri J. Chokka Rao 

10 Shri Chiranji Lal Sharma 

20. Shn Yamuna Prasad Shastri 
21. Shri Dhanraj Singh 

22. Shri Subedar Prasad Singh 

23. Shri Sukhendra Singh 

24. Shri Tej Narain Singh 

25. का Taslimuddin 

26. . Dr. Thambi Durai 

27. Shri Nandu Thapa 

28. Shri P. K. Thungon 

*29. Shri K.-C. Tyagi 

30. Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav 


Secretariat 
Shri G. L. Batra - Joint Secretary 
Shri B. B. Pandit - Deputy Secretary 
Shri K. L. Narang - Assistant Director 


* Shri K. C. Tyagi has resigned fron the membership of the Committee on Estimates with effect from 


.30th August, 1990. 
148-A 


tome Cece ०२ dved >: 


Statement of Recommendations 


No. 


No. 


Para Ministry/ 
Deptt. 


Recommendation 


1 


1 


nN 


iW 


SUCRE T nS eenetenennnn anata eee enneeen nee 


2 


1.42 


1.43 


1.38 Defence 


-do- 


-do- 


4 


The Committee find that verified details of land 
required under each of these categories is not readily 
available with the Ministry of Defence. Consequently 
the Committee are unable to ascertain the shortfall of 
land required under different categories. 


The Committee cannot comprehend how any 
meticulously planning in respect of acquisition of land 
for defence purpose can be done in the absence of 
relevant basic data. They, therefore, consider it 
desirable that appropriate action is taken to maintain 
such data. The committee would like to be apprised 
of the action taken by the Ministry in this behalf. 


Keeping in view the high cost of creating additional 
infrastructure and the need for optimal utilisation of 
existing resources, the Committee feel that it is 
essential that the scales of land authorisation for 
different types of units of establishments of Defence 
Services are fixed taking into account present realities 
in regard to land use and availability in the country. 
The Committee, therefore, welcome the revision of 
Land Norms and hope that these norms will be kept 
under review on a periodic basis. 


Some of the Cantonments have been encircled by 
dense urban agglomeration which, as it is, need 
appropriate lung spaces. The Committet, therefore, 
recommend a cautious and selective approach in 
enforcing the proposed cut in regard to such 
Cantonments. They would expect the defence 
authorities to liaise with their counterparts in the 
civilian administration for this purpose. 


149 


p= 


2 


3 


4 


4 1.46 Defence From a long term perspective the Ministry must 


5 1.47 
6 1.48 
7 1.49 


-do- 


-do- 


-do- 


acquire as many permanent ranges as it can afford 
and the circumstances permit. The Committee desire 
that a long term programme of land acquisition may 
be drawn and implemented for this purpose. 
However, at the same time the Committee quite 
Clearly see the usefulness of carrying out the 
suggested amplifications in the Manoeuvres, Field 
Firing and Artillery Practice Act, 1938. The 
Committee are of the firm view that these 
amendments will not only ease the problem of the 
Army in the immediate context but will also provide 
necessary leeway for rationalisation of the ranges at a 
future date if so warranted by the requirements of 
the training. 

The Committee further feel that with the existing 
procedure it might take an unduly long time to 
complete the identification and acquisition of land for 
organisation of ranges. They, therefore, recommend 
that a Special Team may be constituted for 
reorganisation of ranges for the Seryices so that it 
addresses itself to the totality of the problem from 
identification to acquisition. 


National Test Range is a vital requirement of the 
country. Unfortunately, for one reason or another 
the question of its acquisition has been dragging on 
for the past many years. The Committee desire that 
position may be reviewed, at appropriately high level, 
to resolve this problem through mutual discussion 
amongst all parties concerned. 


Apart from the Defence Services, National Test 
Range is being utilised also by the other agencies of 
the Government. They are, therefore, of the view 
that if this range is going to be used by various other 
agencies to a substantial extent, then the expense of 
acquisition and its maintenance should not be left to 
be borne entirely by Ministry of Defence, the 
resources of which are already scarce. The 
Committee desire that the cost of acquiring and 
maintaining National Test Range should be shared by 
users ON a proportionate basis or through some 
practicable formula. 


8 


10 


11 


1.50 Defence 


1.51 


1.52 


2.39 


-do- 


-do- 


-do- 


151 


Under the Manoeuvres, Field Firing and Artillery 
Practice Act, 1938 Army are not liable to pay any 
rent or any other recurring payment to the land 
owners for conducting field firing in the notified 
ranges which are either private or State Government 
lands. The Committee consider this a legacy of 
colonial rule. They recommend that the Government 
should give a fair deal to the land holders who are 
forcibly dispossesed for a specified duration of the 
year and give them due compensation including 
damages for crops. The Committee urge that for this 
purpose, if necessary, relevant amendments may be 
carried out in the Act in consultation with the State 
Governments. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken by the government in 
this regard. 


The Committee note that there have been instances 
where the Ministry of Defence have failed to take 
timely action in issuing the necessary notification for 
continuing temporary occupation of land on lease 
which has created avoidable problems. The 
Committee are of the view that the time lag between 
the expiry of lease and its renewal etc. should be cut 
to the minimum so as to avoid harassment to the land 
owners. 


The Committee recommend that where Defence 
Services intend to extend occupation of any land for 
a further specific period adequate notice should be 
given to the affected parties. They also expect such 
cases to be duly monitored by the DGDE. 


While the Committee would like the Ministry to 
expedite the final assessment of the three Services in 
regard to lands which are surplus such as abandoned 
air fields and camping grounds they would like this 
exercise to be carried out with some degree of 
finality. All efforts may be made to transfer such 
lands to the State Governments concerned and other 


‘Departments/Public Sector Undertakings of the 


Central Govrnment. At the same time the Committee 
desire that the option of disposing of such lands on a 


152 


4 


12. 2.40 Defence 


13 2.42 


14 


2.43 


-do- 


' -do- 


commercial basis needs to be considered seriously 
and promptly. They would also suggest that some of 
these lands may be offered to civilian population 
living in the adjoining areas and having already 
encroached upon or having access to these lands 
through the respective State Governments. In case 
State Governments do not come forward to take over 
these lands under a time bound programme and on 
terms reasonably advantageous to the Ministry of 
Defence, the Committee are of the view that the 
Ministry of Defence should feel free to either use 
them for self-financing housing projects for the 
benefit of retiring Defence personnel through the 
Army Welfare Housing Organisations or use it for 
other commercial purposes with the assistance of 
agencies like L.I.C. and Housing Urban 
Development Corporation. The Committee also feel 
that such lands can also be advantageously utilised 
for rehabilitation of persons displaced from lands 
which have been acquired by the Ministry in some 
other locations in consultation with State 
Governments. oA 


‘The Committee recommend that apart from grass- 
birs at Gwalior other classified forests being main- 
tained by the Ministry of Defence, as a part of 
various hill Cantonments, should also be considered 
for transfer to the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests. However, they desire the Ministry of 
Defence to keep on maintaining those forest areas 
where they have been using the land even partially. 


The Committee recommend to the Ministry of 
Defence that Old Grant sites and lands which are not 
needed by the Ministry of Defence and also do not 
pose any danger to their establishments, may be 
considered for sale to the original allottees or their 
successors, subject to the verdict of the Supreme 
Court on appeals on Pune resumption cases. The 
Committee expect that the Ministry would undertake 
such an exercise concurrent with progress of cases 
pending in the Courts of Law. 


As the Committee have been assured by the 


.Defence Secretary, the Government will take an 


15 2.48 Defence 
(1) 


2.48 
(3) 


2.48 
(4) 


2.48 
(5) 

2.48 
(6) 


2.48 
(7) 


153 


4 


early decision on the recommendations of the Study 
Team in deciding about the alternative uses of land 
which may become available once Military Farms are 
closed. 


That Cantonments be treated on the same basis as 
other Union Territories/Local Bodies are treated in 
regard to maintenance grants. 


That the payment of service charge which is 33 & 
1/3% of the property tax leviable in respect of its 
properties owned by Ministry of Defence within the 
Cantonments should be brought at par with rates at 
which municipal bodies are entitled to receive service 
charges in respect of Government of India properties. 
Further, the payment of entitled gross amount service 
charges to Cantonment Boards should be made 
mandatory. 


That the Ministry of Defence must enhance the 
grant-in-aid to the Cantonments. 


That Cantonment Boards should be encouraged to 
identify area which are financially unviable and 
commercially utilise such areas in the Cantonments as 
are not likely to serve any Defence purpose. 

That the existing homogenous civic areas from old 
Cantonments like Shillong, Pune, Barrackpore-be 
identified for ultimately handing them over to the 
adjoining civic municipalities. 

That in the development of civic functions like 
sewage, water and power etc. in the Cantonment 
areas there should be greater coordinated and joint 
planning with the existing civilian authorities of the 
respective States. 

That in order to ease the housing shortage in the 
Cantonments, the FSI restrictions, building bye-laws 
and the land use policy be so reformulated as to 
ensure: 

(a) optimum utilisation of the scarce resource of 

land; 

(b) expeditious urban renewal of the station; 

(c) decongestion of crowded locality; and 


(d) planned and regulated development of vacant/ 
sparsely populated localities. 


ete na IEEE eee eee 


2 3 4 


pat 


2.48 Defence The Ministry of Defence should evolve a long-term 

(8) plan for identification and consolidation of military 
areas within the Cantonments and their ultimate 
conversion into Military Stations. 


16 3.21. -do- The Committee desire that the question of 
rationalising and redeploying land and _ building 
resources may be pursued vigorously. At the same 
time Government ought to ponder over the principle 
of self-financing in the Defence Services to the extent 
feasible. This, however, can be possible only if funds 
generated by the Ministry of Defence by sale of 
surplus land and other assets are permitted to be 
ploughed back into the Defence Services Estimates 
through suitable changes in principles of Finance and 
Accounting or under an informal arrangement with 
Ministry of Finance. The Committee urge the 
Government to consider this suggestion with utmost 


seriousness. 
17. 3.23 Rural The Committee feel that the timely completion of 
Deve- _land acquisition process and speedy disbursement of 
lop- compensation to the land owners is most esseftial 


ment 

and, therefore, urge the Government in the Ministry 
of Rural Development to impress upon the 
Ministries/Departments to ensure adequate 
budgetary allocation so that disbursement of 
compensation and taking over of possession of land 
after the declaration of award, are not postponed or 
delayed for any reason whatsoever. 


18  3.24Defence , The Committee desire that requirement of funds 
for land acquisition should be examined properly so 
that precise estimates are made thus leaving little 
scope for any variation between the budget estimates 


and the actual expenditure. 


19 4.40 -do- The Committee recommend that the Ministry of 
Defence should work out appropriate modalities for 
maintaining active liaison with the State Governments 
in order to ensure smooth and speedy acquisition of 
land for Defence purposes.. 


20 4.41 -do- The Committee note that Punjab is the only State 
where Government have prescribed a PERT table for 


155 


food, 


4 


21 


22 


4.42 Defence 


4.43 


Rural 
Deve- 


lop- 
ment 


monitoring progress of land acquisition cases. The 
Committee feel that in order to ensure completion of 
land acquisition within the statutory time schedule of 
three years the Ministry of Defence ought to strive to 
see that the example of Punjab is followed by all 
other States. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
DGDE should monitor the land acquisition cases on 
the basis of a PERT table duly dovetailed with the 
corresponding PERT tables of the project for which 
land is being acquired. The Government should also 
take up the matter with the State Governments for 
making monitoring through PERT technique 
mandatory in such cases. 


The Committee further stress the need for 
encouraging the State Governments to establish State 
and District level Standing Committees to examine 
land acquisition proposals, on the pattern of those 
constituted by the State Government of Punjab. 


To ensure compliance with the over-all time limit 
prescribed under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, the 
Committee desire the Ministry of Rural Development 


to closely liaise with the State Governments and 
impress upon thosé State Governments which have 
yet to specify time limits for completion of various 
processes of land acquisition work as per the 
consensus arrived at in the Land Acquisition 
Conference held in July, 1989. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the outcome as the result of the 
efforts made by the Ministry in this regard. 


The Committee desire the Ministry of Rural 
Development to examine the various principles 
adopted by the State Governments for fixation of 
market value of the land to determine how far these 
have given rise to prolonged and costly litigations for 
enhancement in compensation awarded by Land 
Acquisition authorities. The Committee also call 
upon the Ministry to suggest ways of removing the 
existing deficiencies both in the law and procedure, in 
the interest of the land losers and the State. While 
examining the matter, the Committee would like the 
Government to keep in mind the ig that land for 
the owner is not only an asset but also a mean of 


en ne casei 


136 


4 


24 


25 


5.51 


5.53 Defence 


Urban 
Deve- 


lop- 
ment 


livelihood and when he is deprived of the same, he 
should be suitably compensated for the same. The 
Committee would like to be appraised of outcome of 
such an exercise. 


The Committee firmly believe that RAIP Act be 
amended without any delay so as to provide for 
payment of solatium in cases where any requisitioned 


property is sought to be acquired. However, till such 
an amendment is made, the Committee recommend 
that owners of the property should be given an 
option to receive compensation either on the pattern 
of Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable 
Property Act, 1952 or Land Acquisition Act, 1894. 


The Committee feel that the Land Acquiring 
Department should explore possibility of entering 
into a negotiated award as contemplated in Section 
11(2) of the Land Acquisition Act. They believe that 
by entering into negotiated awards the long drawn 
out legal process for enhancement of compensation 
and payment of interest for the intervening. period, 
which add up to a considerable amount, can perhaps 
be avoided. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that when the process of land acquisition proceedings 
Is initiated, a Committee comprising the 
Representatives of the Acquiring Department, and 
the Land Acquisition Collector concerned should be 
constituted to hold negotiations with interested 
persons for sett'ement of the amount of 
compensation. 


The Committee desire the Ministry to take all steps 
considered necessary so as to improve the situation 
wherein disbursement of compensation to land losers 
is made after protracted delay. They recommend that 
as a first step, the Ministry of Defence should seek 
from the 78505 in the field formations a statement of 
outstanding cases of payment of compensation to 
land losers on declaration of the awards and 
thereafter draw up a programme to liquidate all such 
outstanding compensation within a fixed time-frame. 


The Committee also expect the Ministry to devise a 
scheme with a view to keeping a close watch over the 


27 


29 


31 


6.12 Urban 
Develop- of six years will be the reasonable time limit for 


6.13 


ment 


Urban 


137 


4 


actual disbursement of the compensation to the land 
owners. 


The Committee would recommend that instructions 
may be issued to all Command/Formations/ local 
Defence Estate Oganisations to comply with the 
guidelines laid down for selection of sites for 
acquisition., 


The Committee expect the Ministry of Defence to 
ensure that the field level officers of Defence Estate 
Organisation are fully conversant with the rules and 
regulations of various State Governments governing 
acquisition of land. 


The Committee convinced that a maximum period 
acquiring or releasing the requisitioned properties. 


The Committee recommend that the RAIP Act, 1952 
may be amended accordingly. 


The Committee desire that the Ministry of Urban 


Develop- Development who are the nodal Ministry for the 


ment 


6.14 Urban 
Develop-for inflation that erodes the real value of 


ment 


RAIP Act, should impress upon all the Ministries/ 
Departments to take expeditious action for timely 
reléase of requisitioned properties. It should be made 
clear that it is the responsibility of each Ministry/ 
Department which has requisitioned the properties to 
ensure that these are acquired only when conditions 
specified in the Act for acquisition are fulfilled or 
released from requisition within the period specified 
in the Act. The Committee desire that in cases where 
there is delay and the provisions of the Act are 
violated, apart from releasing immediately such 
properties the responsibility may be invariably fixed 
and suitable administrative action taken against the 
officers found guilty of negligence or apathy. 


In order to compensate the dispossessed persons 


compensation, the Committee recommend that the 
RAIP Act, 1952 be amended to provide for revision 


‘of the recurring part of compensation after the expiry 


of every three years. 


‘The Committee also find it reasonable that in 
accordance with the principles for payment of 


arin iain EE AE TEA a 


2 3 


158 


4 


jcoehoorn ec titi ag i sac, 


33 


34 


35 


7.30 Defence 


7.31 Defence 


7.32 Defence / 


Finance 


compensation enshrined in the Land Acquisition Act 
1894 and additional amount as a percentage of the 
recurring part of the compensation should also be 
paid to the land owner as solatium because in the 
opinion of the Committee the land owner is equally 
helpless in the matter of requisition under RAIP Act, 
1952. 


As the verified land plan with boundary description 
is the elementary requirement for ownership proof of 
the land belonging to the Defence Services, the 
Committee recommend that work on the preparation 
and verification of boundaries of the remaining cases 
of land acquisition should be taken up and completed 
on priority basis. The Committee would also like to 
be apprised within six months of the progress 
achieved by the local Defence authorities in clearing 
the arrears in this regard. 


The Committee fully endorse the view of the 
Ministry of Defence that ‘for dedicated legal support 
on matter connected with compensation, it is 
desirable that at each Directorate and in the offices 
of DEOs having large number of Reference/ Appeal 
cases, an Officer of the Ministry of Law or the legal 
Department of the State Government, should be 
provided on deputation basis.’ 

f 


The Committee recommend that pending a detailed 
work-study by the Staff Inspection Unit of the 
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure), 
the Ministry of Defence should identify the additional 
staff requirements of the DEO on the basis of the 
analysis by Establishment Study Team and other 
cadre reviews and formulate specific proposals for 
necessary financial sanctions. The Committee feel 
that already much time has been lost and situation 
has reached a sorry pass. They are of the strong view 
that there should be a no further delays in according 
necessary financial sanction for required additional 
staff. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government in the Ministry of Finance should accord 
necessary financial sanction keeping in view specific 
needs of DEO and urgency deserved in the matter 
The Committee may be apprised of the actiom taken 
in this regard 


159 


36 7.34 Defence The Committee are of the view that a review of 
delegation of financial powers to officers of DEO 
establishment is overdue and, therefore, desire that 
such a review be conducted expeditiously in regard to 
powers vesting at different levels in regard to all 
matters of requisitioning and acquisition of properties 
both under RAIP Act and LA Act. The Committee 
consider a simultaneous corresponding enhancement 
in financial powers delegated to Formation 
Commanders, in the matter of hiring of immovable 
properties, is also warranted keeping in view the 
inflationary impact. 


37. 7.39 Urban In the opinion of the Committee the proposals of 

Develop- the Ministry of Defence to empower Estate Officers 

ment to requisition and secure police assistance for eviction 

of unauthorised occupants and to provide for 

adequate penalties for encroachers, merit favourable 

consideration by the Ministry of Urban Development. 

The Committee also desire the Ministry of Urban 

Development to finalise early, the proposal of the 

Ministry of Defence to extend the provisions of 

Public Premises (Eviction of | Unauthorised 
Occupants) Act, 1971 to Cantonment Boards. 


38 7.40 Defence The Committee desire the Ministry of Defence to 
examine the legal and other implications of 
instructions issued for regularisation of 
encroachments on Defence lands not in active use of 
Services in the light of different State Laws in 
operation for the welfare of encroachers and also 
keeping in view the principle of equity which enjoins 
upon the Government to follow uniform approach 
throughout the country. 


39 8.24 Rural The Committee recommend that the Ministry of 
Develop- Rural Development should undertake the task of 

ment enacting a common law on the subject of requisition 

and acquisition of land by the Union as well as 

States. However before drafting a Bill for this 

purpose the Committee would expect the Ministry to 

first undertake an indepth and thorough study of the 

various Central and States/Union Territories Laws 


2146 ८५--/फ 3 


40 


9.15 Defence 


160 


4 


and closely interact with the concerned agencies with 
a view to finding out those features regarding proce- 
dure of acquisition, time limits for completion of 
acquisition proceedings, realistic market value of 
land, principles of compensation, speedy disburse- 
ment, opportunities for judicial reliefs to the 
aggrieved, statutory provision for rehabilitation grant, 
resettlement policy and preference in means of liveli- 
hood i.e. in employment opportunities, allotment of 
commercial plots/space etc. and special provisions 
for lands in tribal areas where transactions of land 
have not been recorded properly, which are most 
favourable and advantageous to the land loser, 
whereafter such features as are beneficial to the 
citizen can be blended for drafting a single unified 
legislation for the purposes of requisitioning and 
acquisition of immovable property for the Union as 
well as States/Union Territories. 


In order to obviate the existing disparities in the 
relief and rehabilitation measures for persons affected 
by large scale acquisition of land fdr projects and to 
ensure resettlement of affected persons in appropriate 
manner on an equitous basis, the Committee recom- 
mend that there should be a proper rehabilitation 
policy for the whole of country. They, accordigly, 
urge the Government to have immediate consulta- 
tions with the States with the objective of enacting an 
independent and comprehensive Central law in the 
matter. 


LIST OF AUTHORISED AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF LOK SABHA 
SECRETARIAT PUBLICATION । 


SI. Name of Agent 
No. 


ANDHRA PRADESH 


1. M/s. Vijay Book Agency, 
11-1-477, Mvlargadda, 
Secunderabad-500 306. 


BIHAR 


2. M/s. Crown Book Depot, 
Upper Bazar, Ranchi (Bihar). 


GUJARAT 


3. The New Order Book Company, 
Ellis Bridge, Ahmedabad-380 006. 
(T.No. 79065) 


MADHYA PRADESH 


4. Modern Book House, Shiv Vilas Place, 
Indore City. (T.No. 35289) 


MAHARASHTRA 


5. M/s. Sunderdas Gian Chand, 
601, Girgaum Road, Near Princes 
Street, Bombay-400 002. 


6. The International Book Service, 
Deccan Gymkhana, Poona-4. 


7. The Current Book House, 
Maruti Lane, 
Rathunath Dadaji Street, 
Bombay-400 001. 


8. M/s. Usha Book Depot, ‘Law Book 
Seller and Publishers’ Agents 
Govt. Publications, 585, Chira Bazar, 
Khan House, Bombay-400 002. 


9. M & J Services, Publishers, 
Representative Accounts & Law 
Book Sellers, Mohan Kunj, Ground 
Floor, 

68, Jyotiba Fuele road Nalgaum, 
Dadar, Bombay-400 014. — 


10. Subscribers Subscription Service India, 
21, Raghunath Dadaji Street, 
2nd Floor, 
Bombay-400 001. 


TAMIL NADU 


11. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies, 
14th Murali Street, (1st Floor), 
Mahalingapuram, Nungambakkam, 
Madras-600 034. 

(T.No. 476558) 


SI. Name of Agent 
No. 


UTTAR PRADESH 


12. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel Marg, 
P.B. No. 77, Allahabad, U.P. 


WEST BENGAL 


13, M/s. Madimala, Buys & Sells, 123, 
Bow ,Bazar Street, Calcutta-1. 


DELHI 


14. M/s. Jain Book Agency, 
C-9, Connaught Place, New Delhi, 
(T.No. 351663 & 350806). 


15. M/s. J.M. Jaina & Brothers, 
P. Box 1020, Mori Gate, Delhi-110006. 
(T.No. 2915064 & 230936). 


16. M/s. Oxford Book & Stationery Co., 
. Scindia House, Connaught Place, 
New Delhi-110 001. 
(T.No. 3315308 & 45896). 


17. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari 
Colony, Kingsway Camp, 
Delhi-110 009. (T.No. 7112309). 


18. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency, 
IV-DRS59, Lajpat Nagar, 
Old Dobule Storey, New Dethi-110 024. 
(T.No. 6412362 & 6412131). 


19. M/s. Ashok Book Agency, 
BH-82, Poorvi Shalimar Bagh, 
Delhi-110 033. 


20. M/s. Venus Enterprises, 
B-2/85, Phase-II, Ashok Vihar, Delhi. 


21. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd., 
23/90, Connaught Circus, 
New Delhi-110 001. (T.No. 344448, 
322705, 344478 & 344508). 


22. M/s. Amrit Book Co., 
N-21, Connaught Circus, 
New Delhi. 


23. M/s. Books India Corporation 
Pubiishers, Importers & Exporters, 
L-27, Shastri Nagar, Delhi-110 052. 
(T.No. 269631 & 714465). 

24. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, 
4378/4B, Murari Lal Street, 


Ansari Road, Darya Ganj, 
New Deihi-t10 002. 


19. 
20. 


Corrigenda to 9th Report of 
Estimates Committee 


Reaa 


Introduction 
Camping 
Level 

easily 

DGDE 
६1018 
sparsely 
systematic 
alterations 
statutes 
rationale 
Relinquishment 
workload 

for 

in the 
repealed 

is an Act 


thorough 


Add in the beginning ‘As regards 
maintenance of cantonment Boards, the 


(1991-92) 
Page Para No, Line For 
(1) _ 5 fintroducton | 
1 1.1(111) 1 Campling 
5 Ves 20 Leve 
: 26 essily 
18. 1, 52 4 (50४5 
4g 2.41 12 tiitle 
44 2.48(7) a sparcely 
| 3,24 ic systemic 
IeZe 17 alternations 
5.48 7 status 
6.4 1 rationadle 
128 7,29 1 Relinguishment 
128 7431 2 worked 
130 7,38 10 from 
139 8.12 8 is the 
141 8.22 6 replead 
142 6.23 5 an Act 
143 8,24 2 through 
153 2.48 1 
Committee recommend: 
194 3.23 8 of possession 
157 6.12 1 Committee 


convinced 


the possession 


Committee are 
convinced 


