            STANDING COMMITTEE

13              ON DEFENCE
                  (2005-06)
                FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA




       MINISTRY OF DEFENCE


A CRITICAL REVIEW OF REHABILITATION
        OF DISPLACED PERSONS




      THIRTEENTH REPORT




        LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
              NEW DELHI

        August, 2006/Sravana, 1928 (Saka)
        THIRTEENTH REPORT

STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
           (2005-06)

         (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)


         MINISTRY OF DEFENCE


A CRITICAL REVIEW OF REHABILITATION OF
          DISPLACED PERSONS




         Presented to Lok Sabha on 3.8.2006
         Laid in Rajya Sabha on 3.8.2006




           LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
                 NEW DELHI

         August, 2006/Sravana, 1928 (Saka)
C.O.D. No. 77




Price : Rs. 124.00




© 2006 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.
                                                 CONTENTS

                                                                                                                   PAGES

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2005-06) ............................................                                 (iii)
PREFACE ........................................................................................................     (v)

                                                      REPORT

CHAPTER I                 Introduction ...................................................................             1

CHAPTER II                Rehabilitation Policy in Retrospect .........................                                5

CHAPTER III               State-wise status of land acquired, Compensation
                          paid to the State Governments/families, funds
                          utilized and progress of Rehabilitation .................                                  48

ANNEXURE ....................................................................................................        79

MINUTES OF THE SITTINGS ..........................................................................                   81




                                                           (i)
    COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
              ON DEFENCE (2005-06)

      Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman

                              MEMBERS
                             Lok Sabha

 2. Shri Churchill Alemao

 3. Shri Iliyas Azmi

 4. Shri A.V. Bellarmin

**5. Shri Suresh Chandel

 6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang

 7. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo

 8. Shri Milind Deora

*9. Smt. Priya Dutt

10. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi

11. Shri Suresh Kalmadi

12. Dr. C. Krishnan

13. Shri S.D. Mandlik

14. Dr. K.S. Manoj

15. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya

16. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar

17. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh

18. Shri Manvendra Singh

19. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

20. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod

21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav

 * Nominated w.e.f. 9.12.2005.
** Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 22.12.2005.

                                 (iii)
                                    (iv)

                               Rajya Sabha

    @@22. Shri     R.K. Anand
       23. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
     @24. Shri     Jai Prakash Aggarwal
     *25. Gen. Shankar Roy Chowdhury (Retd.)
       26. Shri T.T.V. Dhinakaran
       27. Smt. N.P. Durga
   ***28. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
      †29. Shri    Pramod Mahajan
       30. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi
    **31. Shri Anand Sharma
       32. Shri Lalit Suri
     ††33. Shri    K.B. Shanappa
      $ 34. Shri   R.K. Dhawan
      $ 35. Smt.   Viplove Thakur

                               SECRETARIAT

           1. Shri S.K. Sharma                 — Additional Secretary
           2. Shri R.C. Ahuja                  — Joint Secretary
           3. Smt. Anita Jain                  — Deputy Secretary
           4. Shri D.R. Shekhar                — Under Secretary
           5. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Committee Officer
           6. Smt. Indu Kaushal                — Executive Assistant




  * Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 18.8.2005.
 ** Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 29.1.2006.
*** Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 8.3.2006.
  @ Nominated w.e.f. 8.3.2006.
@@ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 2.4.2006.
  † Demised on 3.5.2006, consequently his seat remained vacant w.e.f. 3.5.2006.
 †† Nominated w.e.f. 2.6.2006.
  $ Nominated w.e.f. 7.7.2006.
                               PREFACE


    I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2005-06) having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Thirteenth Report on the subject ‘A Critical Review of
Rehabilitation of Displaced Persons’.

   2. The subject was selected for examination by the Standing
Committee on Defence (2004-05). As the examination of the subject
remained inconclusive, it was re-selected by the Standing Committee
on Defence (2005-06) for examination during the year 2005-06.

     3. The Committee during their examination of the subject, took
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of
Rural Development and Ministry of Law and Justice, State Government
officials of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Orissa and Maharashtra on 14 July,
22 August, 21 September, 19 October, 2005, 23 February, 1 March and
30 May, 2006. The Committee also undertook study visits to various
Defence Establishments including those in Karwar, Pune and
Ahmednagar and had interaction with representatives of Directorate
General Defence Estates, District Collectors and Command Officers in
order to understand the ground reality of the subject-matter.

    4. The Committee published a Press Communique in various
leading national and regional newspapers to elicit public opinion on
the subject. In response to that the Committee received 100 memoranda/
representations from various organisations/associations/individuals on
the subject. The Committee also invited some of the non-official experts
and individuals of the project affected families who had sent their
views to appear before the Committee for oral evidence. Names of the
non-official experts/individuals who appeared before the Committee
on 12 and 24 January, 16 and 23 February, 2006 for evidence are given
in Annexure.

    5. Based on the background note, written replies to the list of
points furnished by the Ministry of Defence on the subject, briefing/
oral evidence tendered by the representatives of various Ministries,
State Government officials/non-official experts and the written
memoranda received from the general public, the draft Report was
prepared.

   6. The draft report was considered and adopted by the Standing
Committee on Defence at their sitting held on 31 July, 2006.
                                  (v)
                                   (vi)

    7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry
of Law and Justice, State Government officials and non-official witnesses
for appearing before the Committee for evidence and for furnishing
the valuable material and information in a short span of time which
the Committee desired in connection with the examination of this
subject.

    8. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold type in
the body of the report.




 NEW DELHI;                                BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
2 August, 2006                                                Chairman,
11 Sravana, 1928 (Saka)                   Standing Committee on Defence.
                              CHAPTER I

                           INTRODUCTION

    Government acquire private lands for undertaking welfare
measures. The Ministry of Defence also acquire lands for operational
use of Defence Forces and other Defence purposes. This compulsory
acquisition of private lands, displaces people, from their ancestral land
forcing them to give up their home, assets and means of livelihood.
Therefore, displacement uproots people not just from their homes but
also from their traditional occupations and livelihoods that they are
familiar with. Hence, displacement result into traumatic, psychological,
socio-cultural and economic insecurity.

    1.2 In most cases, the displaced have not been compensated and
resettled. The few who have been resettled have been sent to areas
that are not suited for agriculture or do not support the kind of
occupations that the outstees are used to. Besides, many rehabilitation
places lack basic amenities like health, education, sanitation etc.

    1.3 There was no policy for giving rehabilitation assistance, as a
welfare measure, to the persons displaced by acquisition of their lands
for defence purposes. The existing legislations regarding acquisition of
land i.e. the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (LAA), the Requisitioning and
Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952 and similar Acts in Jammu
& Kashmir do not prescribe any policy for the rehabilitation of the
displaced persons due to acquisition of land. The Ministry of Rural
Development, which is the nodal Ministry on the subject, had not
promulgated any Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy prior to
February, 2004. However, the Ministry of Defence has given assistance
for the rehabilitation of the affected families due to acquisition of land
to the concerned State Governments on demand for such assistance.
The rehabilitation projects were planned and executed by the respective
State Governments.

    1.4 The system of extending cash compensation under the LAA
and such other Acts in most cases do not enable the affected families
to obtain cultivable agricultural land homestead and other resources
which they have to surrender to the State. The difficulties are more
acute for persons who are critically dependent on the acquired assets
for their subsistence/livelihoods, such as landless agricultural workers,
forest dwellers, tenants and artisans, as their distress and destitution
is more severe, and yet they are not eligible for cash compensation.
                                  2

    1.5 Further, due to disputes on ownerships of land in the absence
of valid papers of their lands, the affected persons do not get due
compensation. Further, the State Government in most of the cases do
not adhere to prescribed time limit for awarding compensation and do
not pay compensation as per the actual market value as a result people
go to courts for justice and subsequently final settlements get delayed
and large number of cases are still pending in various courts and
people are still facing manifold problems.

    1.6 To address these problems, the National Policy on Resettlement
and Rehabilitation (NPRR) for Project Affected Families—2003 was
notified in the Gazette of India in February, 2004 by the Ministry of
Rural Development in the form of guidelines. The Ministry of Defence
has adopted these guidelines as a policy in regard to the acquisition
of land for Defence purpose. This policy does not apply to the cases
prior to 2004. For handling new cases, it is mandatory to follow the
NPRR. This Policy states that this is the minimum that every
organisation has to provide to the outstees. However, the Ministry of
Defence or any other agency may offer a higher level of compensation
to deal with the old as well as new cases.

    1.7 The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence has been
acquiring vast tracts of land before Independence and till date for
operational use of defence forces and other defence purposes. The
land is being acquired under age old Land Acquisition Act (LAA),
1894 and Defence of India Act, 1939 framed during the British time
and are colonial in nature. Though these Acts have been amended
from time to time, they are totally inadequate to meet the present
day needs and aspirations of the people. This was amply brought
out during oral evidences, tendered before the Committee by
representatives of Ministry of Law, Rural Development and State
Government officials. The Committee are constrained to note that
there was no policy for rehabilitation of displaced persons as such
and only in 2004, guidelines have been issued in the form of National
Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation (NPRR), 2003. In the
absence of a policy for rehabilitation, the displaced persons were
being given meagre compensation for the land acquired for defence
projects and no effort was being made to resettle and rehabilitate
them properly. In view of foregoing, the Committee strongly feel
that there is an urgent need to have a comprehensive and more
democratic legislation to deal with the matter relating to Land
Acquisition, Compensation, Resettlement and Rehabilitation. The
Ministry of Defence being the largest user of land should take
appropriate initiatives with the concerned Ministries in this regard.
                                   3

The Committee further desire that the Ministry of Defence should
have their own practical and better package for resettlement and
rehabilitation till the commencement of this comprehensive
legislation.

    1.8 The Committee note that large number of people sacrifice
their ancestral land, traditional occupations and livelihoods due to
acquisition of land for various Defence purposes. Therefore, it
becomes the responsibility of the Ministry of Defence to ensure that
the affected people get fair amount of compensation and timely
rehabilitation in order to create a sense of pride and patriotic feeling
in their mind that they have sacrificed their valuable property for
the cause of the nation.

    1.9 The Committee observe that Ministry of Rural Development
is the nodal Ministry on the subject of Land Acquisition Act and
Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy. The Committee understand
that Ministry of Rural Development is mainly responsible for rural
development, therefore, it would not be appropriate to give this
task to it. The Committee strongly feel that the Ministry of Home
Affairs should be made as a Nodal Ministry for formation of laws/
policies in regard to acquisition of land, compensation, resettlement
and rehabilitation for better implementation and coordination.

    1.10 On examining various representations and oral evidences of
the displaced families who have lost their lands due to defence
acquisition over the years, the Committee note that most of them
have not been properly resettled and rehabilitated and are still
suffering. The Committee desire that Government should consider
their cases sympathetically and extend all possible assistance
wherever feasible.

    1.11 The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence is
extending funds to the State Government for rehabilitation packages
as per their demands. The Committee desire that the Ministry must
take regular feed back from State Government on the implementation
of rehabilitation programme and in case of non-implementation and
delay, the accountability may be fixed. The Committee also desire
the Ministry to ensure that the funds given to States for the
rehabilitation programme are not misused or diverted for other
projects. The Committee have also observed that in some cases in
the absence of any demand of the State Government, the displaced
persons have not been given any rehabilitation package. Therefore,
the Committee strongly recommend that the Government should
address this issue in the right perspective to ensure that the displaced
persons are rightfully rehabilitated.
                                   4

    1.12 The Committee take a serious note that the Project
Authorities i.e. the Ministry of Defence/Army Authorities do not
attend the Monitoring Committees headed by the District Collector
to discuss the progress of rehabilitation and sort out the grievances
of the displaced families due to the problem of protocol. Therefore,
the Committee strongly desire that the Ministry of Defence must
ensure that the above authorities attend the monitoring meetings,
irrespective of their rank or designation to facilitate the Collector/
District Magistrate to take a judicious decision for the betterment of
the affected persons.

    1.13 The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence has
adopted NPRR 2003 formulated by the Ministry of Rural
Development which has not been given legislative shape by the
Government and hence is not enforceable in the court of law.
Moreover, it is only applicable to the projects having more than 500
families in the plain areas and more than 250 families in hilly areas
and therefore most of the projects of the Ministry of Defence do not
come under its purview. The Committee wish to recommend that
the Ministry of Defence must evolve its own rehabilitation policy
which is more liberal and is applicable to all the projects irrespective
of the number of displaced families as a kind of social responsibility
of the Government.

    1.14 The Committee also note that a large number of cases
regarding payment of compensation are pending in various courts.
Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence should
try to settle these cases out of court through negotiations and
reconciliations.

    1.15 The Committee also desire that for speedy disposal of
significant number of pending cases for paying compensation and
resettlement of rehabilitation, Government must request the High
Courts to set up special judicial benches in each State.
                             CHAPTER II

            REHABILITATION POLICY IN RETROSPECT

Rehabilitation Policy followed till 1947

    2.1 Prior to 1947 land for defence purposes was being acquired
under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act (LAA), 1894 and in
some cases under the Defence of India Act, 1939. Under the LAA
apart from the compensation based on market value of land, damages
to crops etc, solatium @ 15% of market value was being paid because
of the compulsory nature of land acquisition. In addition interest @
6% per annum on the market value was being paid in case payment
of compensation was delayed. Under the Defence of India Act, 1939,
while market value was assessed as provided under the LAA, 1894,
there was no provision to pay solatium.

    2.2 Apart from this there was no specific policy in respect of
rehabilitation of displaced persons due to acquisition of land for defence
purposes.

Rehabilitation Policy after Independence

The Land Acquisition Act 1894

   2.3 Private lands are acquired for use of Defence Forces. Lands
and assets are acquired principally under the Land Acquisition Act,
1894. Some important stages of acquisition of land in the Land
Acquisition Act, 1894 are as under:

1. Publication of the preliminary notification: Section 4

    Wherever it appears to the appropriate Government that the land
in any locality is likely to be needed for public purpose, a notification
to that effect will be published in the Official Gazette, wherein the
extent of land so required with the revenue khasra numbers is given.

2. Hearing of Objections to land acquisition: Section 5-A

    In case of any objection to the acquisition of land by any interested
person he can file his objections in writing within 30 days from the
date of publication of notification, and the same will be heard by the
Collector.
                                    5
                                   6

3. Declaration that land is required for public purpose: Section 6

    After considering the report of the Collector under Section 5-A,
the appropriate Government gets the declaration to this effect published
in the Official Gazette.

4. Notice to persons interested: Section 9

    Collector publishes Public Notice calling for claims for
compensation from the persons interested including the owners and
occupiers of the land.

5. Enquiry and award by the Collector: Section 11

    The Collector declares his award within a period of two years
from the date of declaration under Section 6 after enquiring into the
objections filed by the persons interested under Section 9.

6. Power to take possession: Section 16

    The Collector after declaration of the award takes over the
possession of land.

7. Special powers in case of urgency: Section 17

    In case of urgency, the collector can take over possession of land
after 15 days from the date of publication of notice under section 9
after tendering payment of 80% of the estimated compensation even
before declaration of award.

8. Matter to be considered in determining compensation: Section 23

    In determining the amount of compensation to be awarded for
land acquired under this Act the Court shall take into consideration
the detailed provision under this Section.

    2.4 The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 was amended in 1984. There
were further improvements in respect of compensation payable. When
acquisition is done under the Land Acquisition Act, besides the market
value of land additional benefit in the nature of 30 per cent solatium
on market value and additional compensation @ 12% per annum was
further payable from the date of Sec 4 (1) notification till the date of
award or till the date of possession, whichever was earlier. Interest on
delayed payments are also being paid. For the first year it was payable
@ 9% and for subsequent years it was @ 15%.
                                    7

    2.5 Land was also being acquired under the provisions of the
Defence of India Acts, 1962 and 1971 and under the Requisitioning
and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952. Under these Acts
there was no provision to pay solatium. In J&K, land is acquired both
under J&K Land Acquisition Act, 1934 and Under J&K Requisitioning
and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1968 (J&K RAIP Act) under
J&K Land Acquisition Act solatium is 15 per cent and no additional
compensation is payable.

    2.6 The market value of land under these Acts also includes
incidental charges payable for damages to standing crops or trees or
damages sustained due to servering from the main chunk of land, or
because of cost incurred for shifting his residence or place of business.

   2.7 However, the Ministry of Defence has given assistance for the
rehabilitation of the affected families to the concerned State
Governments on demand for such assistance. The rehabilitation projects
were planned and executed by the respective State Governments.

Procedure for maintaining Transparency while acquiring Land

    2.8 On being asked about the methods being followed by the
Ministry of Defence to take into confidence the local people for
measurement of land and to maintain transparency regarding the
intention of the Government to acquire land for defence purpose, the
Ministry of Defence in their written replies stated:

    “Land is acquired under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. The Land
    Acquisition Act, 1894 prescribes a detailed procedure to take into
    confidence the local people for measurement of land and to
    maintain transparency regarding the intention of the Government
    to acquire land for defence purposes. This can be seen from the
    following table:

    Section                       Purpose/Procedure

    1                                      2

    4(1)        Govt. intention to acquire land is notified. Notification
                is published in official Gazette and in two daily
                Newspapers circulated in that locality of which at least
                one is in regional language. Also public notice of this
                notification is given at convenient places in the locality
                where land is being acquired.
                          8

1                                2

4(2)   Publication of notice under section 4 (1) authorizes
       Collector to survey the land.

5-A    Upon publication of notice under section 4 (1),
       objections may be filed within 30 days regarding
       acquisition of land. The objections are considered by
       the Collector and forwarded to the State Government
       with his recommendations. The decision of the State
       Government is final.

6      After receiving the decision of the State Government,
       a declaration is published in Official Gazette regarding
       the land to be acquired. The declaration is also
       published in two daily Newspapers circulating in that
       locality of which one is in regional language. Collector
       also gives public notice of this declaration in locality
       where land is being acquired.

8      Collector causes the land marked out measured and a
       plan is to be made out.

9      Notice is given to all person interested in the land to
       appear personally or by agent before the Collector
       regarding their respective interest in the land and
       amount of compensation. The time given to appear is
       not earlier than 15 days from the date of publication
       of declaration.

11     Collector enquires into the objections filed u/s 9 and
       as to the measurements under Section 8 and into the
       value of land. He then makes an award regarding true
       area of land being acquired, the compensation to be
       allowed and apportionment of compensation.

12     As a problem of protocol, such award shall be filed in
       the Collector’s Office and shall be final and conclusive
       evidence.

23     Matter to be considered in determining compensation

28     Collector may be directed to pay interest on excess
       compensation.

28A    Predetermination of the amount of compensation on
       the basis of award of the Court.
                                   9

     2.9 As per section 4&5-A of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, the
Government publish notification in the official Gazette pertaining to
the intention of the Government to acquire land in any locality and
the land owner can file his objections in writing within thirty days
from the date of publication of notification. It is observed that in most
of the time the land owner cannot file his objection in writing because
of in access to Gazette Notification. By the time he comes across the
notification, the thirty days time limit would be over and he cannot
files his objection. When asked about the steps being taken by the
Ministry to rectify these problems, the Ministry of Defence in their
written reply stated:

    “Notification under Section 4 is published in official Gazette and
    in two Daily Newspapers circulated in that locality of which at
    least one is in regional language. Also, public notice of this
    notification is given at convenient places in the locality where land
    is being acquired. Thus the land owner is notified of the intention
    of the Government to acquire land not only through official gazette
    but also through newspapers and public notice in the locality.”

    2.10 During oral evidence session with the representatives of the
Ministry of Defence, it was stated that the people in rural and hilly
areas, may not be conversant with the procedures and formalities what
they are required to do when the land is taken over for defence
purposes. In this regard, when asked about the assistance, being
provided by the Government to these communities, the Defence
Secretary stated:

    “I think whatever the points that have been raised will be taken
    into consideration”.

    2.11 The Committee note that as per Clause 4 of the Land
Acquisition Act (LAA), 1984, the Government communicate to the
landowner its intention to acquire land by publishing Gazette
Notification in two Daily Newspapers, circulated in that locality, of
which at least one is in regional language. Also, public notice of
this notification is pasted at convenient places in the locality where
land is being acquired. The Committee feel that this is not sufficient
and desire that individual notifications should be served to the
affected persons. The Committee are further of the view that this
procedure may be convenient and helpful in places having literate
inhabitants. However, in hilly and remote areas with low literacy
people may not be aware of the notification and the procedures and
formalities that are required to be completed for filing objections.
                                  10

Therefore, the Committee strongly feel that the Government must
evolve a people friendly approach and desire that a representative
of the acquiring authority, in this case i.e. DGDE, alongwith the
District Administration should serve individual notifications and go
to the affected people or local panchayat and brief them regarding
the intention of the Government and assist them in completing
formalities/filing their objections, if any, in writing. Further, there
should be some follow-up action in this regard. The Committee
further desire that while comprehensive review of the Land
Acquisition Act is done by the Government this aspects should be
kept in mind.

    2.12 The Committee are distressed to note that, till now, the
Government acquire the land and displace the people in the first
instance and allocate land to rehabilitate and resettle them at a later
stage. As a result, the people, who have sacrificed their land for the
cause of the nation, have to undergo manifold sufferings for years
together. Therefore, the Committee desire that the acquiring authority/
Ministry of Defence should take necessary initiatives to undertake
an advance planning for suitable rehabilitation and resettlement of
the displaced persons and convey the same to the affected people so
as to maintain transparency and gain their confidence.

Section 8—Land to be marked out, measured and planned

    2.13 Section 8 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 empowers the
Collector to measure and plan the land in case, it is not been done
under Section 4.

    2.14 From the above Section, the Committee note that there is
no provision for joint measurement of land by District Collector
and Project Authorities and representatives of affected families.
During their study visits to some States, the Committee observed
that the system of joint measurement varies from State to State. In
Bikaner, Rajasthan there was no system of joint measurement, while
in Pune, the Maharashtra Government follows the system of joint
measurement and pay the measurement charges. The Committee feel
that without joint measurement the land of the affected people cannot
be correctly measured.

    The District Collector, while measuring the land, generally
measures the undisputed land and leaves aside the title disputed
land, as a result of which the disputes and court cases are increasing
and the large amount of compensation money given to the State
Government is lying unspent with the District Collector.
                                     11

    Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the provision
of joint measurement should be clearly specified under section 8 of
the Land Acquisition Act. In the joint measurement, besides the
District Collector, a representative of the Ministry of Defence/Defence
Estate Officer and affected persons should be made the participants.
The Committee feel that this will not only pave the way for to
correct measurement of land, but also ease the likely disputes and
lessen the burden of the courts. Above all, this will facilitate in
paying actual compensation to the affected persons in time. The
Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence should consider this
seriously and take up the matter with the State Governments.

Special power in case of urgency

    2.15 As per Section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act in case of
urgency, the Collector can take over possession of land after 15 days
from the date of publication of notice under section 9, after payment
of 80% of the estimated compensation even before declaration of award.

    2.16 The Defence establishments at times acquire land for temporary
activities particularly for undertaking tests, trials, training purposes.
When asked about the policy of the Government for paying
compensation to the affected persons including compensation for the
standing crop and whether such affected persons are intimated
sufficiently in advance by way of notification or otherwise about such
acquisition, the Ministry of Defence in their written replies stated.

    “Land is hired and rental charges are paid whenever it is needed
    by troops temporarily. Compensation for damages for crop is also
    paid. As to whether those lands are occupied by troops are
    intimated sufficiently in advance or not depends upon the urgency
    of operational requirements.”

    2.17 The Committee were informed through a representation that

    “In the year 1991, Director General, Defence Estates (DGDE) on
    behalf of the army authorities decided to acquire land measuring
    2954.47 acres falling in different villages and in village Karoli, Tehsil
    Pathankot, Gurdaspur involving the Urgency Clause of the Land
    Acquisition Act at an estimated cost of Rs. 9,23,53,600/-and
    accordingly necessary notifications for acquisition of land were
    issued and a sum of Rs. 7,38,82,880/-(80% of the sanctioned
    amount) was deposited by the concerned army authorities for
    making payments to the farmers of village Karoli and adjoining
    areas. Later army authorities again notified that land in village
                                  12

   Karoli and adjoining areas was not required by the time, it was
   decided to reverse the earlier decision to withdraw from acquisition
   of land a sum of Rs. 2,37,06,860/-had already been disbursed to
   the landowners. The defence authorities are now resorting to very
   harsh recovery measures from the landowners”.
    2.18 The Committee note that land was acquired by the Ministry
of Defence in Gurdaspur District of Punjab under Urgency Clause
and compensation for the same was paid to the displaced families.
The Ministry of Defence later found that the above land was not
required and decided to withdraw the acquisition. This shows failure
of the Ministry of Defence to anticipate and plan as per the
requirement of the project envisaged. The Committee strongly
recommend that the Ministry of Defence should apply Urgency
Clause only in rare cases and before that it should plan its schemes
prudently.
    The Committee are given to understand that the Ministry/Defence
Services is now following harsh methods for recovery of amount
paid to the land owners. While taking strong objection to it, the
Committee wish to point out that it has been a loss for the farmers
and displaced families as due to acquisition, they could not cultivate
their land and surrendered it for the cause of the nation.
    The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of
Defence to make recoveries in easy installments after taking into
account the losses suffered by farmers who could not cultivate their
land due to hasty acquisition by the Ministry of Defence.
Payment of Compensation and determination of Market value
    2.19 Pertaining to paying compensation, the Ministry of Defence
in their written replies further stated:
   “Compensation amount that becomes payable u/s 23 of the LA,
   Act consequent to the award of the Collector is deposited with the
   Collector. Under Article 258 of the constitution of India the
   functions of Land Acquisition Act, 1894, in regard to the appropriate
   government have been entrusted to State Governments. The amount
   of compensation payable is assessed by the Collector by taking
   into account various factors as laid down in the Act.”
    2.20 the provisions for compensation under the various Defence of
India Acts are as follows:
      (a) Defence of India Act 1939: prescribes that the provisions
          for compensation as contained in section 23 (1) of the Land
          Acquisition Act would be taken into consideration while
          fixing market price of land.
                                 13

      (b) Defence of India Acts 1962 and 1971: lay down that the
          compensation of any property would be the price which
          the requisitioned property would have fetched in open
          market if it had remained in the same condition as it was
          at the time of requisitioning and being sold on the date of
          acquisition.

    There is no specific provision for payment of additional grant for
resettlement of displaced persons under these Acts.

   2.21 During oral evidence, the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence further stated:

   “The Land Acquisition Act says that whatever is the market price,
   when the Section (4) notification was made, should be taken into
   account. There are other things like solatium at 30 per cent, then
   12 per cent additional account as compensation. All these things
   are prescribed under the Act so he will go by that. He goes mostly
   by the local information, registered sale data but as you would be
   knowing that, when the registration takes place, normally people
   also register at a lower rate just to avoid stamp duty. When
   somebody makes an assessment, he has to go by the documents
   available before him”.

    2.22 When asked whether the acquiring authority takes into
consideration the consumer price index/wholesale price index or cost
of living index for a particular period, the Ministry of Defence, in
their written replies stated:

   “The compensation for land is determined by the Collector in
   accordance with the provisions of Section 23 of the Land
   Acquisition Act. The section contains a number of factors that may
   be taken into account by the Collector for determining the total
   compensation payable”.

    2.23 While answering to a query, whether compensation has been
disbursed in all the cases of land acquisition and if not what are the
main reasons for that the representatives of the Ministry of Defence,
during oral evidence stated:

   “As per the information collected, we have given the details
   regarding some of the major projects. It would be seen that in
   almost all the projects, the major payments have been released
   barring a few cases where the payment, has not been made by the
   Collector because of the dispute in ownership. Otherwise, from
                                  14

   our side, whatever money is required, we have sanctioned and
   released to the State authorties. Particularly, in the case of
   acquisitions under the Urgency Clause, where there is an immediate
   requirement of land, that is acquired under Section 17 of the LAA.
   Before passession is taken over, the Government pays 80% of the
   compensation and 20% is given after the formalities are completed.
   There is no such case where we have taken over land under the
   Urgency Clause and not made payment.”

     2.24 The Committee note that the compensation for land is
determined by the Collector in accordance with the provisions of
Section 23 of the Land Acquisition Act. The Committee further
observe that the District Collector while determining market value,
goes mostly by the local information and registered sale data. But it
is worth-mentioning here that when the registration takes place,
people normally register at a lower rate to avoid stamp duty.
Therefore, simply taking into consideration the registered sale data
while calculating the market value is not fair and correct since it
results into paying lesser compensation to the affected persons than
the actual market rate. This has resulted in large number of affected
persons filing cases in various courts. The Committee further
understand that in many cases, the Courts have awarded higher
compensation than the award declared by the District Collectors
which the Government has to pay at a later stage. To avoid all these
litigations and give fair prices to the displaced persons, the
Committee desire that the recent guidelines issued by the
Government of India in regard to computation of land value be
taken as a base improvement whereby prices are decided by State
Revenue Department for different zones and categories like irrigated,
unirrigated, urban, semi urban rural etc. The Government should
also take into account the Consumer Price Index for a particular
period for computing land value. This will facilitate the correct
evaluation of acquired property of the people. The Committee further
wish to recommend that the Ministry of Defence should insist the
State Government to take the assistance of land valuers/assessors
and follow the above-mentioned guidelines and have a constant
liaisoning with the State Government and monitor the progress of
payment of compensation to the affected persons and see that the
Collector is paying the market price by keeping in mind the above-
mentioned factors. The Committee further desire that earnest efforts
should be made to settle the matter through negotiation/reconciliation.
In case of any dispute, the matter may be referred to Lok Adalat
and if it is beyond possible, the cases may be sent to arbitration
where service of the experts may be utilized. The Committee further
desire that while calculating the value of land and other property,
the acquiring authority must take a humanitarian approach and pay
the compensation accordingly.
                                    15

The rationality of acquisition of additional land

     2.25 It has been learnt from one of the representations received by
the Committee that for defence projects, unnecessarily vast tracts of
land are taken from civilians irrespective of actual requirement of the
project e.g. for National Defence Academy (NDA), 8,000 acres of land
was acquired, out of which not more than 25% is utilized, rest has
remained un-utilized even after 60 years. When asked to state the
justification for acquiring more land and whether the Ministry is
thinking of returning the land to the displaced persons by preserving
the ownership rights of defence authorities, the Ministry of Defence in
their supplementary replies stated.

    “Acquisition of land for defence related activities is being done
    keeping in view the present and future requirements. Requirement
    of land is established by a Board of Officers as per given scale of
    land authorization and acquisition is done based on laid down
    rules and procedures. Excessive land is not acquired. Since funds
    for executing various planned projects are not available in bulk,
    some of the areas which are otherwise zoned for various units/
    installations remain vacant, possible giving an erroneous impression
    that the land is in excess to the requirement and is remaining
    unutilised. It is reiterated that no land is acquired more than
    authorised requirement. There is no proposal for return of land to
    the displaced persons.

     2.26 The process of judging the necessity of acquisition of land for
a project including that for ranges, its examination and procedure
followed for acquiring land as stated by the Ministry of Defence in
their written replies is as follows:

     “(i) Assessment of Necessity: The requirement of additional land
          is vetted by the concerned branch in the Service Hqrs. and
          thereafter, in principle approval of the Ministry of Defence
          is obtained.

      (ii) Board proceedings: Once Govt. ”in principle” approval has
           been obtained, the Local Defence Authorities prepare a
           consolidated Board Proceedings. A representative of the
           Collector is a member of the Board. The Board obtains ‘No
           Objection’ from the State Govt. for acquisition of land. At
           this stage State Government may also project any special
           requirements regarding rehabilitation and resettlement of
           displaced persons. The Board Proceedings carry detailed
           technical justification of project, justify land requirements as
           per laid down scale and cost estimates. In January 2005,
                              16

       instructions have been issued that the Board shall also find
       out if, as per the laid down criteria, the NPRR-2003 will
       also apply to the project, and, if so, it is to estimate the
       cost of rehabilitation as provided in the NPRR-2003. The
       Board proceedings are approved by the respective Service
       Hqrs.

 (iii) Examination of the proposal: The detailed proposal is
       scrutinized at various levels from technical, environmental,
       financial and administrative points of view. The proposal
       completeness and land-cost points of view are approved by
       DGDE and submitted to Ministry of Defence (MoD) for
       obtaining Govt. sanction.

 (iv) Administrative Sanction: This is issued by the Ministry of
      Defence (MoD) giving details of the acquisition and financial
      sanction.

  (v) Proceedings under the Land Acquisition Act: After issue
      of Govt. sanction, the Defence Estates Officer places a
      demand for land acquisition with the Collector. The Collector
      then proceeds to acquire the land as per provisions of the
      Land Acquisition Act, 1894. The Defence Estates Officer is
      actively involved at this stage in the various activities
      provided under the Act such as carrying out joint survey
      of land and making an inventory of assets. To safeguard
      the interests of MoD, he also assesses the value of land and
      advises the Collector accordingly to help in declaring the
      award.

   Above stages for acquisition of land ensure that land is
acquired only when it is necessary for defence purposes.”

2.27 During oral evidence the representatives further stated.

“The third point is about the land that has been acquired, but not
being used for the purpose for which it was acquired. The case
that you have mentioned is in the questionnaire, pertaining to the
National Defence Academy. This is one of the cases which was
highlighted there, which was circulated to us. The point is that
according to the Army, the user, it is not necessary that the entire
land which has been acquired should be built. There are some
areas which need to be left as a buffer zone; there are certain
areas which are needed for future expansion of the project; there
are areas where some planning is there, but the actual construction
has not taken place because of the constraints of funds, etc. So,
there are various factors which are not enabling the particular
                                    17

    organization to fully utilize the entire acquired land, but over a
    period of time, as you would have seen in many places, these
    constructions do take place at different phases. So, because the
    land is lying vacant at present, it gives a totally misleading
    impression outside that the defence people are mindlessly acquiring
    the land and not putting it to use the unnecessarily harassing the
    people by displacing them. That type of impression goes around
    because of these factors.
    2.28 On being asked, whether acquisition of land should be time
based or by phases, the Principal Secretary, Karnataka, during oral
evidence stated:
    “Acquisition should be done related to when you want the land.
    For example, Sea Bird is a fantastic project. Land acquisition was
    completed way back in 1991 and the notification was issued for
    this project in 1985 to 1986. They were completed later and by
    about 1988, there were 12 villages and 10,000 acres of land was
    acquired and 4000 families were displaced in the Sea Bird Project.
    This action was completed by 1991. For ten years, there was no
    action because of various administrative reasons. Now we have
    paid Rs. 25 crores as the value of private land for 2546 acres.
    They have gone to the court. The court have started deciding on
    the matter.
    2.29 During oral evidence of the State Government officials, it was
stated that there should be a clear-cut time for acquisition of land for
the project. Suppose, the project is taking 10 years and is to be
implemented in three or four phases, the project authority/State
Government should acquire land for the first phase first. The second
phase should be later and third phase should be much later. When
asked to comment on this issue, the Ministry of Defence in their written
replies stated:
    “The land is acquired by the Ministry of Defence under the Land
    Acquisition Act, 1894. The land acquisition proceedings once started
    after issue of notification under Section 4(1), are normally to be
    completed within a period of 3 years. Acquisition of land if resorted
    to in phases will result in delay, cost escalation. If the cost of land
    is not negotiated and paid for within a reasonable time at the first
    instance there are chances of losing the land at the time of need”.
    2.30 During oral evidence, the Ministry of Defence further clarified
as under:
    “I would like to submit that when we go for land acquisition, the
    land requirement is done on a futuristic projection. Suppose today
                                  18

   I require a land of about 100 acres, but in future there may be a
   need for 1000 acres, but I must seize the opportunity today to
   acquire it because I will pay only for the value of the land which
   is the current market value. So having acquired only 100 acres
   and leaving 900 to be acquired in phases, then we have to pay
   more. That is why, the entire spectrum of activity is considered by
   a board of officers at the highest level in the Government and a
   decision is taken on how much land should be acquired and for
   what purpose, etc.”

     2.31 On being asked, whether there is a periodic review made
later on regarding the utilisation of acquired land and the future plan,
the Defence Secretary, during oral evidence stated:

   “There is no problem of reviewing. My only point is that the
   project is then handed over to the concerned Service. It is for the
   Service which does this, seeing their future expression and future
   needs, whether they require the entire land or even more land etc.
   In many cases, they have asked for adjoining areas because they
   found that the land which had been acquired is not enough; on
   the other hand, if there is surplus land, then certainly a review
   mechanism should be installed. Then, they can review some of the
   cases, as you said the land is rented out etc. I think, it could be
   from the buffer zone.”

Releasing of surplus Defence land for carrying out developmental
activities

    2.32 During oral evidence session of the Ministry of Defence, it
was pointed out that in many cases, the Ministry of Defence is having
surplus land. For widening of roads of National Highway, State
Highways or the village approach Road or for carrying out other
developmental activities, when the concerned authorities approach, the
Ministry of Defence, in many cases they face disappointment. On being
asked how the Ministry of Defence is helping the developmental
activities without damaging the security aspects, the representatives of
the Ministry of Defence stated:

   “We have a fair amount of close interactions at the project level.
   If there are issues which do not get resolved, they are certainly
   brought up. We have coordination meetings. We have good land
   at many places. Sometimes temporarily, flyovers are made and
   sometimes permanently because widening of roads require that
   kind of land.”
                                  19

    2.33 During deliberation, it was pointed out that when the request
comes at the ground level, in many cases it is being turned down
without going to the highest authority. When asked whether there is
any mechanism that the proposal may come to the Ministry of Defence
for examination, the Ministry of Defence during evidence stated:

   “We will establish that mechanism. The request comes at the
   ground level.”

    2.34 The Committee observe that acquisition of land for defence
related activities is being done keeping in view the present and
future requirements. Requirement of land is established by a Board
of officers as per given scale of land authorization and acquisition
is done based on laid down rules & procedures. The Committee are,
however, given to understand that in some projects, like National
Defence Academy (NDA) 8,000 acres of land was acquired, out of
which not more than 25 per cent, is utilized and rest has remained
unutilised even after 60 years. During the study visits of the
Committee to various projects, the Committee had observed that there
are large areas of defence land, lying unutilised and they have not
been given back to the ex-landowners. In this connection, the
Committee are informed that the users have to leave certain portion
of land as buffer zone and there are certain areas needed for future
expansion. Plan for using the land is there but due to constraints of
funds and other reasons the users are not in a position to utilize the
whole land. As a result, this gives a totally misleading impression
that the defence authority is acquiring land mindlessly.

    Since land is a scarce commodity the Committee desire that the
Ministry of Defence should set up a high level group to review the
total land acquired, actual utilization thereof and the requirement of
land in future for all Defence projects. During the review, the
Government should also see the possibilities to re-allocate the surplus
land, if any, to the affected people for the use of agricultural
purposes, on lease/contract basis. This will not only avoid resentment
among the people but also facilitate meaningful utilization of surplus
land.

     2.35 In this connection the Committee wish to reiterate their
earlier recommendation given in their 5th Report on the Cantonments
Bill, 2003, i.e. to bring a separate law on Defence land at the earliest
for their better management.
                                  20

TECHNOLOGY

    2.36 The Committee observe that Technological development is
taking place very rapidly in India and world wide. It has wide
effect on different segments and way of working and requirements
of the Government. The Committee are of the view that keeping in
view the rapid development of technology the Ministry of Defence
must review its decision on requirement of vast acquisition of land
for Defence purposes and its likely use.

    2.37 The Committee observe that in many projects, the Ministry
of Defence is having surplus land. For carrying out developmental
activities, like widening of road of National Highways, State
Highways or the village approach road, when the concerned
authorities approach the Ministry of Defence, the request is examined
at the ground level and is turned down without sending it to the
highest authority. Therefore, the Committee strongly feel that there
must be a mechanism in the Ministry of Defence at the highest
level to examine these issues and facilitate the developmental
activities without affecting the security of the nation.

    2.38 The Committee observe that the Ministry of Defence acquire
land for temporary use of Defence Forces such as training,
mobilization of forces and day to day operational purpose. As a
result the land owners have to loose their standing crops and other
properties. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry of
Defence should ensure that the affected people must get due
compensation for their standing crops and other properties.

Court Cases

    2.39 The details of number of cases pending in various courts
regarding compensation paid to the affected people for acquiring their
lands are as follows:

   “Number of land reference cases:                          5952
   Number of execution cases:                                3400
   Number of cases in the High Court:                        4272
   Number of cases in the Supreme Court:                     1844
   Number of arbitration cases:                               182

   Total                                                   15650”
                                   21

   2.40 During oral evidence, the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence stated:

   “You had also asked for information about various court cases
   pending in regard to land acquisition. We have compiled
   information and found that there are about 15,600 cases in different
   courts like lower courts, the High courts and then in the Supreme
   Court. There are also execution cases. Under the Land Acquisition
   Act, there is an in-built provision for the enhancement for
   compensation. If anybody is aggrieved with the Award amount
   declared by the Collector, he goes to the reference court and if he
   is still not satisfied, he goes to the High Court. After that also, the
   last point is the Supreme Court. So, these are legal processes and
   they have been going on. In most of these cases, which are very
   old cases, where acquisition has been completed, people have
   accepted the compensation and land has been taken over but still
   the litigation is going on.”

     2.41 Once the case enters the court, either lower court or High
Court or Supreme Court, the litigations go on and there is no end at
all. When asked, how the Ministry is going to solve these problems
and give justice to the affected persons, the Ministry during oral
evidence stated:

   “In all these types of cases, whether it is land acquisition or
   something else, wherever the Government requires to either appeal
   or not to appeal, the Ministry consult the Ministry of Law under
   the Business Allocation Rules of the Government of India. The
   views of the Ministry of Law are taken. In case the Ministry of
   Law says that we do not have a case, then we will not proceed.”

Court cases due to dispute of ownership of Land

    2.42 When there is a dispute regarding rightful claimants then
such disputes are referred to court by the collector and thus the cases
get delayed. In many cases these disputes have continued for more
than eight years. When asked about the corrective measures being
taken by the Government in this regard, the Ministry in their written
reply stated as under:

   “Section 30 of the Land Acquisition Act lays down that when any
   dispute arises as to the appointment of the compensation, the
   collector may refer such dispute to the court. Since these disputes
   require adjudication of the Legal rights of the persons, therefore,
   the courts are the proper forum for resolving such disputes.”
                                  22

    2.43 Expressing apprehension, about the settlement of these disputes
in near future, when the Committee wanted to know, whether the
project authorities in consultation with the District Administration and
the Revenue Administration are going to develop any parameter to
solve these problems so that the people get compensated in time, the
Defence Secretary, during oral evidence stated:

   “I think whatever the points that have been raised by the
   Hon. Member and the Hon. Chairman will be taken into
   consideration. We have our own guidelines. Generally, the District
   Authorities are there with the people. In cases where there is no
   landlord, the person on the ground may not be considered as
   land-owner. There is no doubt that there is absentee Landlordism.
   The real owners are somewhere else and they are doing some
   other works. The person on the ground does not have the
   ownership of that Land. We rely very heavily on the District
   authorities, and we will keep on all these points while framing
   the guidelines”.

Declaration of Higher compensation by higher courts

    2.44 On the issue of Supreme Court order for paying higher
compensation the representatives of Ministry of Defence, during briefing
stated:

   “What was given in the award by the Collector was raised quite
   high to a substantial extent by the Supreme Court. I had checked
   up this thing and I found that the Collector initially had fixed a
   rate which subsequently increased by the reference court. Then
   the people went to the High Court. The High Court further
   enhanced that rate. Then, the State Government field Special Leave
   Petition (SLP) in the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court did not
   accept the SLP so the High Court order remained valid. That is
   how the increase in compensation has taken place. This is
   happening in most of the cases may be because the humanitarian
   aspects are involved and the people are being displaced. It is
   because the collector assesses his quantum of compensation based
   on the parameters given in the Land Acquisition Act. The Land
   Acquisition Act says that whatever is the market price, when the
   Section (4) notification was made, should be taken into account.
   There are other things like solatium at 30 per cent, then 12 per
   cent additional account as compensation. All these things are
   prescribed under the Act so the District Collector will go by that.
   He goes mostly by the local information, registered sale data but
   as you would be knowing that, when the registration takes place,
                                   23

    normally people also register at a lower rate just to avoid stamp
    duty. When somebody makes an assessment, he has to go by the
    documents available before him. So, there is every scope for
    increasing this type of compensation whenever land is acquired.
    Of course, there is a provision for a consent award, that is,
    wherever an agreement is possible between the people who are
    being displaced and the Collector. So, there is no problem. Then,
    there is no scope for further litigation. That type of thing is very
    rarely happening. Of Course, in the latest case of acquisition of
    land for the naval project in Visakhapatnam, the Government of
    Andhra Pradesh is trying for the consent award. So, hopefully
    there will be no litigation in that. Once, the award is declared by
    the Collector, the amount is given by the Ministry of Defence
    unless there is some inherent deficiency or some lacunae in the
    assessment process.”
    2.45 Pertaining to paying of compensation, the Principal Secretary,
to Government of Karnataka, suggested that:
    “You have asked that about ten years back, we have acquired and
    you have given one price and the court gives another price. Then
    price given by the court is ten times more than the price ten years
    back. If you give ten times more today, we will stick to the old
    price. It applies to the various scales. The scales that are intimated
    for various grants and conditions must be time related. They must
    be corrected for every two or three years. These must be linked to
    consumer Price index or the wholesale price index or the cost of
    living index. If we do not have these corrected factors, such scales
    have no relevance and they fail miserably.”
    2.46 The Ministry of Defence is paying huge amount to the
respective States but the land owners do not get that money in time.
After accepting same amount, people go to the court of law and after
10 to 30 years they get huge compensation. In this connection, when
asked to state whether there is any provision through which they can
negotiate or have joint counselling and submit a reconciliation plan to
the court of law, the Ministry of Defence, in their written reply stated:
    “As per existing provisions of Land Acquisition Act, after Collector
    declares and award under Section 11, the land owners if not
    satisfied may file re-reference before the Collector for referring the
    matter to the District Court for adjudication. Even after adjudication
    of the District Court, if the land owners are not satisfied they may
    approach the High Court or if Union of India is not satisfied with
    the award of the District Court, it may file an appeal before the
    High Court and further on to the Supreme Court.
                                   24

   Court cases take a long time to settle. As per the provisions of the
   Land Acquisition Act, the individual has right to make reference
   through Collector for adjudication by District Court. After the
   decision of the Reference Court, depending upon the merits of the
   cases and legal advice of the competent authority, the option of
   referring the matter to Lok Adalat may be considered.”

    2.47 When asked whether the Ministry of Defence has ever
specifically asked the State Government to provide consent award for
paying compensation to the oustees, the Ministry of Defence in their
written reply stated:

   “In one project of land acquisition for Naval Alternate Operating
   base, District Visakhapatanam, on the request of the State
   Government of Andhra Pradesh, the Ministry of Defence has agreed
   for a consent award.
   Project status is as under:
   Section 4(1) notification issued     :   14.8.2005 to 2.9.2005
   Section 6 notification issued        :   20.8.2005 to 9.9.2005
   Consent Award declared on 17.1.2006 at the rate of Rs. 3 lakh per
   acre.”

   2.48 In replying to a query about the final rehabilitation, the
Ministry have implemented, the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence, during oral evidence stated:

   “The method what was used in the project of Vishakhapatnam, is
   a very good method. In fact, the State Government make out the
   package when we give the money to the State Government for the
   project to be implemented. In that process, if the Land Acquisition
   Officer, and specially the Collector has greater dialogue with the
   people whose land is going to be taken, it is much more effective.”

   2.49 On negotiated settlement, the Principal Secretary to Karnataka
Government during oral evidence stated:

   “That is the best way, there is no substitute for negotiated
   settlement. We acquired Seabird through negotiated settlement only.
   You have not heard any agitation, any protest against such project
   which has been completed four years back. Narmada is one-third
   of operation of rehabilitation. All over the world everyone knows.
   Even today, it is not completed. But we completed acquisition
   projects, three times bigger than that four years back successfully
   because of this kind of negotiated settlement.”
                                    25

   2.50 He further stated:

   “Krishna River Project is three times bigger than the Narmada. We
   have acquired, so far, 2,80,000 acres of land displacing 80,000
   families in the last one decade for which we have followed
   precisely, what your kind self has just mentioned, at the negotiated
   prices and not compensation. We have paid Rs. 1,200 crore in the
   last seven years. This is consent price. Non-consent price is hardly
   about seven per cent of the total project cost. In this, there is no
   middleman; there is no court reference. And the whole consent
   award is done not on a one-to-one basis, but there is a Advisory
   Committee at the District level, at the Taluka level consisting of
   the local MLA, MP representative of the affected people, the local
   civil judge or the district judge, the agricultural office, the collector,
   the divisional commissioner. This Committee deliberates, and it
   goes on into several meetings. Then, they finalise and explain to
   the Government. After the Government accepts that, becomes a
   norm. At this moment, we are paying, per acre of dry land,
   Rs. 70,200 per acre of dry land; Rs. 1,17,000 per acre of single wet
   land; Rs. 1.5 lakh for double wet land. For horticulture land and
   plantation land, it goes as high as Rs. 5 lakh per acre. These are
   negotiated settlement; and nobody has gone to the court. The
   payments are made in the Gram Sabha. The rates are also fixed
   through this consent process, in the village-after-village after the
   Committee negotiates it.”

    2.51 In many cases, compensation awarded for the land acquired
has been very less and no rehabilitation or resettlement was done by
the authorities concerned. When asked to State how the grievances of
those people who have not adequately been compensated in the past
could be redressed, the representatives of the Ministry of Defence,
during oral evidence stated:

   “The initial compensation as awarded by the Collector is not
   adequate or found to be insufficient. So, people have gone to
   various courts and wherever the court has arbitrarily increase the
   amount, the Government also has gone in appeal and many cases
   are pending in the various higher courts like High Court and the
   Supreme Court. Now under the present dispensation, as per the
   Land Acquisition Act, there is a statutory provision if anybody is
   evicted and he is not happy with the amount of compensation, he
   can file a case with the Collector for reference and then the District
   Court adjudicates.”
                                 26

   2.52 They further stated:

   “There is a provision for Lok Adalat. Now Lok Adalats have been
   tried in Karnataka and it was successful. Bu they must be agreed
   only when the case can go beyond the District Court. If a case is
   pending in the High Court and both the parties want to amicably
   settle, then there has to be an agreement. Then the High Court
   directs the case to be decided by the Lok Adalat and whatever is
   the decision of the Lok Adalat, it will go back to the High Court
   to become a decree which is accepted by both the parties so that
   beyond that stage there is no further litigation.”

    2.53 The Committee note with concern that about 15650 cases
are pending in lower courts, High Court and Supreme Court
regarding compensation paid to the persons whose land was acquired
by the Government for Defence purposes. The Committee are
surprised to note that in most of the old cases where acquisition has
been completed and even after the people accepted the compensation
and land has been taken over, still litigation is going on. The
Committee are concerned to note that significant number of cases
relating to compensation have been pending in the courts for a long
time, due to dispute in ownership or appeal preferred by the State
Government against the enhanced compensation awarded by the
lower court. The Committee understand that in rural areas many
persons live in a joint family and occupies a piece of ancestral land
without having a legal document in their favour. Such a property is
invariably declared by the acquiring authority as a disputed property
and compensation is either not paid or withheld. Therefore, the
Committee are of the view that for identification of owner of such
property, Government should apply the law of limitation and take
note of genuine possession of land, views of the local Panchayat
and Gazetted Officer of that local area. The Committee also feel
that Law Officer of the Central Government may be posted as
designated officer of the Defence Estate, to give timely advise
regarding processing of litigations arising out of land acquisition.
The Ministry of Law has to play pro-active role in this regard.
Looking to the past experience, it may be seen that most of the
cases are relating to award of land compensation have been decided
in favour of the displaced persons. The Committee therefore strongly
recommend that Government should follow a flexible and logical
policy in such matters to pay the compensation, and the State
Government instead of filing appeal against the enhanced award of
reference court, should come forward for reconciliation/negotiation
to settle the dispute finally outside the Court.
                                   27

    2.54 The Committee are deeply concerned over the delay in
awarding enhanced land compensation to the owners whose land
has been acquired by the Government. The Committee would like
to quote a case Law of Union of India Vs. Munshi Ram (Dead) by
LRS and others, where writ petition filed by the Union of India
challenging redetermination order alleging that redetermination of
compensation payable must be on the basis of the decree as modified
and not on the basis of the decree as originally passed by the
reference court. The Court inter alia held that we hold that under
Section 28A of the Land Acquisition Act, the compensation payable
to the applicants is the same which is finally payable to those
claimants who sought reference under Section 18 of the Act. In case
of reduction of compensation by superior courts, the applicants under
Section 28A may be directed to refund the excess amount received
by them in the light of reduced compensation finally awarded.

    In the facts and circumstances of the case, these appeals are
allowed and a direction is made to the Collector under the Act to
redetermine the compensation payable to the respondents in
accordance with the compensation awarded by the judgement and
decree of this Court dated 29th April, 1997 and pay the same to the
claimants within a period of three months from today.

    The Committee in view of the above decision of the Court desire
the Ministry of Defence to take up the matter with the State
Government in order to implement decree of the Hon’ble Court to
confer the benefits of enhanced compensation even to those who
did not seek a reference under Section 18 of the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894. The Committee also desire that above ruling should be
made applicable for all the Land Acquisition Cases pertaining to
the Ministry of Defence.

National Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation (NPRR)

    2.55 Till recently, there was no policy for granting rehabilitation
assistance to the persons displaced by the acquisition of lands. Recently,
a National Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation (NPRR) for Project
Affected Families has been formulated by the Ministry of Rural
Development. This has been notified in Government of India Gazette
on 17.02.2004. The Ministry of Defence has adopted these guidelines
in regard to the acquisition of land for defence purpose. Necessary
direction have been issued to all Service Headquarters and Departments
under the Ministry of Defence for implementation of this policy.
                                   28

    2.56 When asked whether the Ministry treat NPRR as a guidelines
or does it treat as a policy, the Defence Secretary during oral evidence
session stated:

    “We have actually adopted these guidelines as a policy. Keeping
    in view its comprehensive nature. This is the minimum which is
    ensured by these guidelines. If there is anything beyond this which
    the State Government has in its package, that can be considered
    depending on the merit of the case.”

    2.57 Pertaining to the existing Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy
of the Government of India, the Principal Secretary, Government of
Karnataka during oral evidence has stated that:

    “It is a Policy and not law. It is only advising and almost somewhat
    mandatory. The National Policy does not state that the States should
    not have their Policy but it stated if any State for any project
    wants to have any policy which is better than that policy, they can
    have it. There is no bar, what is suggested in the National Policy
    is the basic, barest minimum conditions.”

   2.58 Pertaining to legal basis of NPRR, the representatives of
Ministry of Law during oral evidence clarified as under:

    “Now the Policy which has been framed is not law unless it is
    passed by the Parliament in the form of an act or amendment to
    the Land Acquisition Act. That is one thing. However, the Policy
    has a legal basis in the absence of legislative enactments by
    Parliament; and executive Policy also has been interpreted as law
    because executive powers of the Government are said to be co-
    extensive with the legislative powers of the Government.”

    2.59 The Committee observe that prior to 2003, there was no
policy for granting rehabilitation assistance to the persons, displaced
by the acquisition of land. In 2003, National Policy on Resettlement
& Rehabilitation (NPRR) for Project Affected Families was formulated
by the Ministry of Rural Development. This has been notified in
Government of India Gazette on 17.2.2004. The Committee, while
examining the subject, have also examined the provisions of National
Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation (NPRR), 2003. The
Committee are given to understand that this policy provides only
guidelines for the Ministries which are not enforceable in the Court
of Law, unless the same is passed by the Parliament in the form of
an Act.
                                   29

    2.60 The Committee are constrained to note that even after
59 years of Independence, there is no law or rule governing
resettlement and rehabilitation and the Government of India is
following the age old colonial laws for this purpose. Therefore, the
Committee strongly recommend that the Government must give a
serious thought to bring a Bill for giving a legislative shape to the
Rehabilitation/Resettlement Policy at the earliest.

Provisions to deal with cases prior to 2004

    2.61 When asked about the Policy available with the Central
Government, to deal with the cases prior to 2004, the Secretary, Ministry
of Rural Development during deposition before the Committee clarified
as under:

    “Rehabilitation will go along as per the practices then in force as
    per the Act. But, there is nothing that prevents an agency which
    wants to offer a higher level or wants to make this policy
    applicable. They can do it. Only the Policy is not mandatorily
    applicable to them. That freedom to do it is still with them.
    Actually, they can take it up with their own Ministry. They can
    get approvals for whatever they want to give this package. Nothing
    prevents them from doing it. There is no bar from our side. We
    are saying that from this date this will be applicable. The Ministry
    of Rural Development is only concerned with this mandatory thing
    after this.”

   2.62 During oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence, they have further stated:

    “In our case, we had earlier informed that in any case the
    rehabilitation is the responsibility of the State Governments. Prior
    to this, event if there was no policy as such, but wherever there
    was a demand from the State Government for specific rehabilitation
    grant, the Ministry of Defence has given grants in different
    projects.”

    2.63 The Committee observe that there was no policy to deal
with rehabilitation and resettlement prior to 2004. Acquisition of
land and rehabilitation was the responsibility of the State
Governments. The Ministry of Defence was paying to the State
Governments as per their demand. The Ministry of Defence has
adopted these guidelines to deal with the cases from 2004 onwards
and not to deal with earlier cases. The Committee are pained to
note that there are old cases pending in the courts and in many
                                   30

cases people have not received their dues and their suffering is
prolonging. Keeping in mind the large scale suffering of people and
to provide justice to the common man, who has sacrificed his
ancestral property for the safety and betterment of the nation, the
Committee desire the Ministry to re-think over this issue and take
necessary approval of the competent authority to provide a practical
and liberal rehabilitation package to the cases prior to 2004. The
Committee further desire that the Ministry should have a constant
liaisoning with the State Governments to monitor the progress of
rehabilitation and actual utilization of monitory allocation provided
by them for the said purpose.

Better Packages

    2.64 When asked whether any organisation/Ministry can have a
better package over the existing Policy, the Secretary, Ministry of Rural
Development, during oral evidence has clarified that:

    “Any agency is actually entitled to give a better deal. But the
    Point is this is the minimum benchmark that we are laying down.
    Many of the Public Sector Undertakings do actually offer better
    packages. Better packages are being offered by Coal India,
    Department of Power, National Highway Authority of India and
    some of the State Governments like Himachal Pradesh, Orissa etc.
    We have written a letter to all the Central Government Ministries
    and Departments that they can offer higher package, but we have
    said that this is the minimum that they should give.”

    2.65 When asked whether the Ministry of Defence is considering
to have its own Rehabilitation Policy for providing better package in
the line of other Ministries/organisations, the Ministry of Defence, in
their written replies furnished to the Committee, stated:

    “NPRR 2003 has already been adopted by the Ministry of Defence
    as its rehabilitation policy and there is no proposal to frame a
    separate policy for the Ministry of Defence alone.”

    2.66 The Committee are given to understand that many Public
Sector Undertakings, Departments, Ministries and State Governments
are offering better rehabilitation package. Even the Ministry of Rural
Development has communicated to all the Central Government
Ministries and Departments that National Policy on Resettlement
and Rehabilitation (NPRR) only specifies the minimum benchmark
and they can offer higher package. However, the Committee are
constrained to note that the Ministry of Defence are satisfied with
                                  31

the policy and has adopted it as its rehabilitation policy and there
is no proposal to frame a separate, more liberal policy. The
Committee deplore the callous attitude of the Ministry of Defence
and strongly recommend that the Ministry of Defence should adopt
a practical and liberal approach and frame its own policy having
better packages for the betterment of affected families which may
be treated as a model package for other Departments/Ministries to
follow.

Applicability Criteria

   2.67 The provisions of NPRR are applicable in the following cases:

      (i) Displacement of 500 families or more enmasse in plain areas;
          and
      (ii) Displacement of 250 families or more in hilly areas, desert
           development blocks or areas notified in Schedule V and
           Schedule VI of Constitution.

    2.68 When asked about the view point of Ministry of Defence on
the criteria, of NPRR, the representatives of Ministry of Defence during
briefing has stated:

   “But the fact is that, as of now, whatever proposals have been
   sanctioned for acquisition, they do not attract the provisions of
   this national policy because the policy states that the guidelines
   will be applicable where the acquisition involves 500 families in
   the plain areas of 250 families in the hilly terrains. Recently we
   had sanctioned one project for the Navy at Vizag. Though it is
   not a big project, the families involved are about 400. So, the
   guidelines are not specifically applicable to that project. Besides
   that, there is no on-going project which has been sanctioned by
   the Government for acquisition which is attracted by this NPRR.
   But we have some projects which had come to us for approval.
   One of those projects is from the Poona circle, that is, from
   Ahmednagar.

       The proposal is to acquire about 532 acres. We returned that
   proposal asking Army Headquarters to tell the Board of officers to
   take into consideration the factors which have been given in the
   National Policy on Rehabilitation and Resettlement. Unless those
   aspects are taken care of, no project will be sanctioned. If the
   project involves displacement of 500 people in the plain area or
   250 families in the hilly terrain and if the guidelines have not
   been followed no proposal will be sanctioned. That has been made
                                   32

    very clear to all the Service Headquarters. This in essence is the
    policy being followed by us in the Ministry.”

    2.69 However, in a subsequent oral evidence session, the
representatives of Ministry of Defence stated:

    “Wherever the population criterion is not fully met, we have had
    in the past, given grants, wherever there is a demand. The same
    attitude will continue in future too.”

    2.70 When asked about the applicability of the provisions of NPRR
to projects having less than 500 families in plain areas and 250 in hilly
areas, the Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development during oral
evidence session stated:

    “The policy is not applicable for below the 500 at the moment it
    is not applicable. The special additional provisions are not
    applicable.”

    2.71 The Principal Secretary to Government of Maharashtra during
oral evidence has put forth the following view point:

    “I would like to state that whether it is 250 or 50 or 100, any
    person whose remunerative asset like land which he owns lawfully
    is acquired against his will, he should be rehabilitated as a kind
    of social responsibility of the Government. The arbitrariness of
    55 or 50 etc. should not be there. This was not the intention of the
    recommendations of the national level workshops several times
    which went before the Committee of Ministers for enactment which
    rejected. They were not expected by the Government of India in
    2002-03.”

    2.72 He further stated that:

    “Now there is a Group of Ministers appointed by the hon. Chief
    Minister which is looking into the R&R issues and they are drafting
    a new R&R Policy which we call the Draft R&R Policy, 2006. We
    have already circulated it. It is also available at the website of the
    State Government. It is further improvement of R&R Policy, 1997,
    for the mining projects and industries. It has got many special
    features which are not there in the national policy. The national
    policy is not applicable if the number of displaced families is less
    than 500 in the case of non-tribals and less than 250 in the case
    of tribals. But our policy is applicable even if there are ten people
    who are displaced.”
                                 33

    2.73 The Committee note that the provisions of NPRR—2003 are
applicable in the case of displacement of 500 families or more in
plain areas and 250 families or more in hilly areas. The Committee,
however, note that most of the Defence Projects do not come under
the purview of NPRR, since they do not meet the criteria mentioned
in it. The Committee feel that the criteria given in NPRR are vague
and not practical. Therefore, the Committee wish to recommend that
the Ministry of Defence must evolve its own rehabilitation policy
which will be applicable to all the projects, irrespective of the
number of displaced families, as a kind of social responsibility of
the Government.

Rehabilitation and Resettlement Benefits for Project Affected Families

   2.74 The detailed R&R benefits for Project Affected Families are
mentioned in Chapter VI of NPRR 2003 which are as mentioned below:

   “The resettlement and rehabilitation (R&R) benefits shall be
   extended to all the Project Affected Families (PAFs) whether
   belonging to below poverty line (BPL) or non-BPL.

   Any Project Affected Family (PAF) owning house and whose house
   has been acquired may be allotted free of cost house site to the
   extent of actual loss of area of the acquired house but not more
   than 150 sq.m. of land in rural areas and 75 sq. meter of land in
   urban areas.

   Each PAF of BPL category shall get a one-time financial assistance
   of Rs. 25000/- for house construction. Non-BPL families shall not
   be entitled to receive this assistance.

   Each PAF owing agricultural land in the affected zone and whose
   entire land has been acquired may be allotted agricultural and or
   cultivable waste land to the extent of actual land loss subject to a
   maximum of one hectare of irrigated land or two hectares of un-
   irrigated land/cultivable waste land subject to availability of
   Government land in the districts.

   Stamp duty and other fees payable for registration shall be borne
   by the requiring body.

   The Land allocated under para 6.4 shall be free from all
   encumbrances. The Land allotted may be in the joint names of
   wife and husband of PAF.

   In case of allotment of wasteland/degraded land in lieu of acquired
   land, each PAF shall be get financial assistance of Rs. 10000/- per
                                34

hectare for land development. In case of allotment of agricultural
land, a one-time financial assistance of Rs. 5000/- per PAF for
agricultural production shall be given.

Each PAF having cattle shall get financial assistance of Rs. 3000/-
for construction of cattle shed.

Each PAF shall get financial assistance of Rs. 5000/- as transportation
cost of shifting of building materials, belongings and cattle etc.
from the affected zone to the resettlement zone.

Each PAF comprising of rural artisan/small trader and self
employed persons shall get one-time financial assistance of
Rs. 10,000/- for construction of working shed/shop.

Each PAF owning agricultural land in the affected zone and whose
entire land has been acquired shall get one-time financial assistance
equivalent to 750 days minimum agricultural wages for “loss of
livelihood” where neither agricultural land nor regular employment
to one member of the PAF has been provided.

Each PAF owning agricultural land in the affected zone and how
consequently becomes a small farmer shall get one time financial
assistance equivalent to 375 days minimum agricultural wages.

Each PAF belonging to the category of ‘agricultural labourer’, or
‘non-agricultural labourer’ shall be provided a one time financial
assistance equivalent to 625 days of the minimum agricultural
wages.

Each displaced PAF shall get a monthly subsistence allowance
equivalent to 20 days of minimum agricultural wages per month
for a period of one year upto 250 days of MAW.

In the cases of acquisition of land in emergent situation such as
under Section 17 of the Land Acquisition Act 1894 or similar
provision of other Act in force, each PAF shall be provided with
transit accommodation, pending resettlement and rehabilitation
scheme. Such families shall also get R&R benefits as mentioned in
above paras under the policy.

Acquisition of Long Stretches of Land: In case of projects relating
to Railway Lines, Highways, Transmission Lines and laying
                               35

pipelines wherein only a narrow stretch of land extending over
several kilometers is being acquired the project affected families
will be offered an ex-gratia amount of Rs. 10000/-per family, and
no other Resettlement & Rehabilitation benefits shall be available
to them.

The Project Affected Families shall be provided necessary training
facilities for development of entrepreneurship to take up self-
employment projects at the resettlement zone as part of R&R
benefits.

The Project Affected Families who were in possession of forest
land prior to 25th October, 1980 shall get all the benefits of R&R
as given in above paras under the Policy.

The PAFs of Scheduled Caste category enjoying reservation benefits
in the affected zone shall be entitled to get the reservation benefits
at the resettlement zone.”

R&R Benefits for Project Affected Families of Scheduled Tribes

Each Project Affected Family of ST category shall be given
preference in allotment of land.

Each Tribal PAF shall be entitled to get R&R benefits mentioned
in above Paras under the Policy.

Each Tribal PAF shall get additional financial assistance equivalent
to 500 days minimum agriculture wages for loss of customary
rights/usages of forest produce.

Tribal PAFs will be resettled close to their natural habitat in a
compact block so that they can retain their ethnic, linguistic and
cultural identity.

Tribal PAFs shall get land free of cost for community & religious
gathering.

Tribal PAFs resettled out of the district/taluka will get 25% higher
R&R benefits in monetary terms.

The Tribal Land Alienated in violation of the laws and regulations
in force on the subject would be treated as null and void and the
R&R benefits would be available only to the original tribal land
owner.
                                    36

   The Tribals families residing in the Project Affected Areas having
   fishing rights in the river/pond/dam shall be given fishing rights
   in the reservoir area.

   Tribal PAFs enjoying reservations benefits in the affected zone shall
   be entitled to get the reservation benefits at the resettlement zone.

    2.75 On being asked about the most feasible and practical policy
prescribed and whether the acquiring authority is supposed to develop
the rehabilitation package, the Ministry of Defence in their written
replies stated:

   “The scheme and plans for resettlement and rehabilitation are to
   be framed by the Administrator for resettlement and rehabilitation
   under Chapter V of the NPRR 2003. The Administrator is to prepare
   the draft scheme of the plan in consultation with representatives
   of the affected families including women, Chairpersons of elected
   Panchayati Raj institutions within which project area is situated.
   This draft scheme/plan is then submitted to the State Government
   for approval. It is the responsibility of the State Government to
   obtain the consent of the requiring body before approving the
   same. The details of R&R benefits are mentioned in Chapter VI
   NPRR 2003.

   2.76 On rehabilitation and resettlement, the Principal Secretary,
Karnataka Government during oral evidence stated:

   “Rehabilitation and resettlement are distinguished. Generally, in
   this parlance, resettlement refers to physical shifting of people from
   Place X to Place Y. But rehabilitation is much longer, far more
   difficult and a very complicated process. Failure particularly is in
   respect of rehabilitation not mostly in respect of resettlement. In
   case of resettlement, it is something like this. There was a village
   like this. There was a village you have acquired it and the people
   were shifted from one place to another. If there was good drinking
   water facilities give that facility in that place, if there was a school,
   you build a school there.

   If there was a cinema theatre, you build that there; if there were
   temples and roads in that village from where they have been
   displaced, you build those there. Here you are only creating
   physical infrastructure. That is very easy but when it comes to
   giving people their livelihood option, given them employment,
   training, occupation, that is most difficult. It is because, it depends
   on the family situation, education of members, the likes and dislikes
   of members and it is a very difficult proposition.”
                                   37

    2.77 On being asked what should be a feasible and practical policy
prescribed or a package for resettlement or rehabilitation like location
specific, situation specific and community specific, he further stated:

    “Now we are talking about the project Seabird which is a naval
    project. It is the coastal people who are involved here. If you take
    away the fishermen from the coast. It is like taking away the fish
    out of the water. They can not do any other work. They have kept
    to the coastal line only. So area specific package will have to be
    developed. There cannot be a single common minimum guidelines
    and that is where. I criticize that the policy is not practical and
    not correct, because they have converted every items of facility
    into monetary term. It is true but the point is that money alone
    is not important for rehabilitation. It requires much more than
    that. On the rehabilitation side, training should be there. There are
    half a dozen things under occupation which one those half a dozen
    things which should be applied in the given situation, that should
    be decided according to the local community conditions. But there
    could be no single general universally applicable principle. If you
    go to the North-East, those people are one community. If you go
    to the plain area or the coastal, they are one community the tribal
    areas are of one community. So these things must be taken into
    consideration.

    2.78 When enquired about the measures being taken by the
Ministry of Defence to ensure that the oustees are able to take up
their traditional job at the place where they are being rehabilitated,
the Ministry of Defence, in their written replies submitted:

    “There is no provision in NPRR 2003 to ensure that the oustees
    are able to take up their traditional job at the place where they
    are being rehabilitated. However, the scheme/plan for resettlement
    and rehabilitation of the project affected families is made in
    consultation with representatives of the project affected families,
    including women and Chairpersons of elected Panchayati Raj
    Institutions. This is expected to take care of the needs of the
    oustees.”

    2.79 When asked whether providing land is the best alternative in
rehabilitation policy, the Principal Secretary, Karnataka Government
during oral evidence stated:

    “Land for land as the only prescribed because for resettling some
    people, you are displacing others. It must be one of the alternatives,
    but not the only alternative. May be, it is appropriate for tribals,
                                   38

   but not for non-tribal people. Therefore, our considered and serious
   opinion is that land as a rehabilitation policy may not be the only
   correct policy of must be a mixture.

    2.80 The non-official witness who appeared before the Committee
to render oral evidence further suggested:

   “Land has to be given. Alternate accommodation and alternate
   livelihood must be given in the circumstances in which they were
   surrounded, field survey should be conducted for this purpose.
   Land must be given to adivasi people in which they are attuned
   and also the means of livelihood.

   2.81 On rehabilitation package, one of the non-official witness
appeared before the Committee suggested that:

   “Social sector, inflation push economy are the elements to be
   considered while giving monetary considerations of the evacuees.
   When we give some monetary benefits as compensation for the
   land, our aim should be that the money which are given should
   not be exploited. There should not be any elements of haste to the
   evacuees. Whatever money we give to them should be properly
   used by them. In addition to the money consideration, I would
   like to add on the issue that the evacuees should be given analysed
   value of the pension per month so that they can live a decent
   living. The other activities to be given to them should be based on
   the elements of their sufferings. As such, we should give them the
   medical facilities, free army schools, and also opportunities for
   their rehabilitation. In case, their dependent members need to have
   employment, they should be given some chance just like reserved
   categories and others, but it should be according to the Army’s
   rules and regulations. It should be strictly according to their merits.”

    2.82 On the issue of providing ceiling under scale of various grants
in the NPRR, the Principal Secretary, Karnataka Government, during
oral evidence stated:

   “Coming back to the ceiling under scale of various grants that we
   give, in the national policy, it has already laid down 20 days of
   minimum wages and two years of maintenance grant, one year of
   equivalent production. These kinds of things will have to be related
   to time. As regard the price base line, unless you have continuous
   correction elements built into that, it does not give the desired
   result.”
                                   39

     2.83 The Ministry of Defence is undertaking a number of
acquisitions within five kilometers or ten kilometres in the border area.
A number of tanks etc. are passing through the lands of the people.
As a result these poor farmers or the landless persons have been
suffering. In this regard, when asked about the mechanism being
following by the Ministry of Defence to help the sufferers or displaced
persons the Ministry of Defence, during oral evidence stated:

    “As we have already stated, we have adopted this national policy
    on resettlement and rehabilitation. Under these guidelines, there is
    a provision. In that itself there is a component that when we go
    for acquisition, then the package has to be finalised by mutual
    consultation. The Collector will consult the people there who are
    going to be displaced and finalise a package and the final approval
    is given by the requiring body. So, all these concerns that you are
    expressing, I think, will be addressed in that.”

    2.84 The Committee observe that compulsory acquisition of
private lands displaces persons from their ancestral land and property
forcing them to give up their home, assets and means of livelihood.
Therefore, displacement uproots people not just from their homes
but also from their traditional occupations and livelihood they are
familiar with. The system of extending cash compensation under the
Land Acquisition Act (LAA) and such other Acts in most cases does
not enable the affected families to obtain cultivable agricultural land,
home, means of livelihood and other resources. To address these
problems, the NPRR, 2003 was notified by Government of India
and came into force w.e.f. 2004. The Committee have examined the
provisions of rehabilitation and resettlement benefits and are of the
view that the objectives of NPRR are not properly reflected in the
provisions. The Committee, therefore, wish to recommend that
resettlement/rehabilitation should be location-specific, situation-
specific and community-specific. In coastal village, fishermen should
be resettled in another coastal area only because they are accustomed
to continue with their traditional occupation and to earn perpetual
income therefrom. A village having tribal population should be
resettled in a homogenous area having their own people, so that
they do not feel out of place.

    2.85 The Committee further recommend that the rehabilitation
site must have skill-based training, education and different types of
occupational provisions, suitable to the local community. Besides,
the rehabilitation package should provide village roads, drinking
water, primary medical facilities.
                                  40

    2.86 The Committee further recommend that there has to be some
sort of coordination mechanism to monitor progress in regard to
actual disbursement of money made available to the State
Government by the Ministry of Defence.

Training/Education

    2.87 On being asked about the kind of rehabilitation package other
than the compensation the Ministry is going to provide to the displaced
persons like their services, training, education, employment, housing
and drinking water facilities etc., the Defence Secretary during oral
evidence stated:

   “As we have explained in the case of Visakhapatnam, for the newer
   projects, the package is being proposed by the State Government.
   We go by the State Government. We have adopted the guidelines.
   Apart from that, if there is anything, which the State Government
   suggests, then we consider it and we give through the State
   Government. There is no mechanism by which we can supervise
   this or we can actually instrumentalise. It is the State Government.
   The subject of land is with the State Government.

   So, the State Government makes out a package in concerned
   projects and according to that package the award is given to the
   State Government and then they implement that.”

   2.88 The Principal Secretary to Karnataka Government during
deposition before the Committee stated:

   “Sir, you asked me about what should be the training arrangements,
   educational arrangements, rehabilitation arrangements and all that.
   I will briefly finish my submissions on them one by one. Training,
   education, employment, land are some of the things which intend
   to help the families of the oustees to re-establish economic
   sustenance and their basic livelihood option so that they may not
   be put to great hardships. Training is for whom? Not everybody
   can be trained. People who are approaching their retirement age,
   or are in their middle ages or those who cannot read and write,
   such people cannot be trained. The training is basically for the
   second generation, the young educated boys and girls of the
   displaced families. Training should be there. It should be one of
   the items, but not the only option. Same is the case with education.
   Training and skill development are basically for second generation,
   for the first generation, this can be an option. It should be there
   for the second generation as one of the options.”
                                   41

    2.89 When asked regarding policy of the Ministry for providing
reservations to the wards of project affected people in professional
and other higher educational institutions and also for employment in
various defence establishments on lines of those of some of the State
Governments, the Ministry of Defence in their written replies stated:

    “There is no such policy to provide reservations to the wards of
    project affected people in professional and other higher educational
    institutions and also for employment in various defence
    establishments.”

     2.90 In the case of project Sea-Bird, at Karwar, it has been observed
that no doubt that the Ministry of Defence and the project Sea-Bird
officials as well as the district administration is making some efforts.
A lot of efforts has gone into it like setting up of ITI training people;
trying to absorb them etc. However, in some other cases, people are
not being given employment or being recognized because of want of
a certificate regarding their permanent owners of the land or those
who were living on the land but they did not have the revenue title.
When it was asked, besides imparting training to young people in ITI,
whether the Government is considering to provide some gainful
employment to the oustees like providing grocery shops, Milk shops,
vegetable shops etc., the Defence Secretary, during briefing stated:

    “These are all very important factors which will make not only
    the life of the oustees a little better but also those who stay there
    because they require certain provision, they require fresh vegetables,
    schooling and all these kinds of things. The township requires all
    these things. Dialogue with the local authorities, especially with
    the Revenue and Development officers a very important factor
    which would ensure that there is satisfaction amongest the people.”

    2.91 The Committee are distressed to note that development and
implementation of rehabilitation package, including providing
training education, employment, housing, health and sanitation is
the sole responsibility of the State Government. The Ministry of
Defence just provides the money to the State Governments as per
their demand for implementation of the rehabilitation package. The
Ministry of Defence does not have any mechanism/trained manpower
to supervise the actual implementation. The Committee strongly feel
that in case of compulsory displacement, the oustees not only lose
their land and ancestral properties but also their vocation and means
of livelihood for the cause of development of the whole nation.
Therefore, our country, being a welfare State, must strive to provide
                                   42
training, education, employment, facilities for potable water, health
services and sanitation to help the families of the oustees to re-
establish economic sustenance and the basic livelihood. The
Committee further desire that to enable the oustees to carry out
their traditional job in a more scientific way and to pursue new
vocational courses, the Government should establish ITI and other
vocational institutions in the rehabilitation sites. Besides, the
Government should provide simultaneous training facilities to the
youth of displaced families as per the job requirements of the
defence projects so as to enable them to avail employment
opportunity in the said project. The Government should consider to
provide some gainful employment to the oustees.

    2.92 The Committee strongly feel that the Ministry of Defence
should share the responsibility with the State Government by
appointing an Estate Officer to coordinate and monitor the
rehabilitation projects, being executed by the State Government, for
effective implementation of rehabilitation package.

Monitoring Mechanism

    2.93 The Ministry informed the Committee that before 2004, the
Ministry used to pay money to the State Government basically to
compensate for the land only. No attention was given to compensate
for their means of sustenance, especially in the case of farmers. In this
context when asked whether any study has been done so as to provide
ideal kind of rehabilitation to people who were displaced prior to
2004 and is there any monitoring Mechanism available with the
Ministry of Defence to oversee the payment of compensation to the
affected persons by the State Government, the Ministry of Defence, in
their written reply stated:

    “The Ministry of Defence has not conducted any study to provide
    ideal kind of rehabilitation to people who have been displaced
    prior to 2004. With regard to the monitoring mechanism for
    rehabilitation projects prior to 2004 the monitoring was being done
    by the respective State Governments. However, in some projects
    like the Project Sea-Bird and the project at Nalanda, the Ministry
    of Defence has been associated by the State Governments in
    monitoring the implementation of rehabilitation scheme.”

    2.94 When asked why the Ministry was not associated with the
monitoring mechanism alongwith the State Governments in case of
other projects, the Ministry in their written replies stated that:

    “Since the responsibility of planning, acquisition and monitoring
    of the earlier rehabilitation projects was that of respective State
                                  43

   Governments therefore, the Ministry of Defence was not associated
   with the monitoring mechanism alongwith other State
   Governments.”

    2.95 When asked whether the Ministry is aware about the fact
that the money paid towards the acquisition of land has not reached
the displaced persons and has the Ministry focused its attention on
identifying the issues/problems relating to disbursement of
compensation to the displaced persons by the State Government for
its projects and whether the Ministry has any mechanism to obtain
periodic review/feedback from the State Government pertaining to the
progress of the work relating to rehabilitation and resettlement, the
Ministry of Defence, in its written reply stated:

   “In most cases of acquisition of land money paid towards the
   acquisition of land has reached the displaced persons. In some
   cases, money could not be paid by the Collector because of title
   disputes/court cases. The present procedure of disbursement of
   compensation is as follows:

   Normally the compensation amount is paid to the landowners by
   the Collector immediately after declaration of the award. When
   acquisition is done under urgency clause, 80% on account payment
   is made even before declaration of award. When there is a dispute
   regarding rightful claimants, then such disputes are referred to
   court by the Collector and thus the payments get delayed. The
   Defence Estates Officers maintain a constant liaison with the
   Collectors at the field level to progress the complete work land
   acquisition”.

   2.96 On periodic feed back, they further stated:

   “Periodical feed back is being received from State Governments
   pertaining to work relating to rehabilitation for Project Seabird
   and Project at Nalanda. For the other projects periodical feedback
   has not been received. Information relating to these projects has
   been gather recently”.

    2.97 In the National Policy on rehabilitation and resettlement, the
monitoring mechanism is prescribed in Chapters VII and VIII. As per
provisions in para 7.1.1 of the policy, the State Government shall
constitute a Resettlement and Rehabilitation Committee under the
chairmanship of Administrator, to monitor and review the progress of
                                    44

Resettlement and Rehabilitation projects for project affected families.
The Committee shall, inter-alia, include:—

       (i) a representative of women residing in the affected zone.
      (ii) a representative each of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
           Tribes residing in the affected zone.
     (iii) a representative of a voluntary organisation.
     (iv) a representative of the lead bank.
      (v) Chairman or his nominee of the PRIs located in the affected
          zone.
     (vi) MPs/MLAs of the area included in the affected zone.

    2.98 At a higher level, para 7.2.1 of the policy lays down that
State Government shall constitute a Grievance Redressal Cell under
the Chairmanship of the Commissioner for Resettlement and
Rehabilitation for redressal of Grievances of the project affected families.
Any project affected family, if aggrieved for not being offered admissible
R&R benefits as provided by the policy, may move a petition for
redressal of its grievances to the Grievance Redressal Cell. The form
and manner in which and the time within which the complaints may
be made to the Grievance Redressal Cell and disposed of, shall be
prescribed by the State Government.

    2.99 At the apex level, a National Monitoring Committee has been
constituted under para 8.1 of the policy. The Chairman of the National
Monitoring Committee is the Secretary, Department of Land Resources.
The Committee will have the following members or their nominees
not below the rank of Joint Secretary:

       (i) Secretary, Planning Commission
      (ii) Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
     (iii) Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources
     (iv) Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs
      (v) Secretary, Ministry of Railways
     (vi) Secretary, Ministry of Power
     (vii) Secretary, Ministry of Coal.

   2.100 Besides the above, the Secretary of the Administrative
Ministry for which the land is to be acquired shall be one of the
members of the Committee.
                                   45

     2.101 National Monitoring Committee is serviced by a National
Monitoring Cell constituted by Department of Land Resources. The
cell shall be headed by an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary.
    2.102 When asked whether the Ministry of Defence will associate
with the State Government to monitor the progress of the Rehabilitation
of the displaced people prior to 2004, the Ministry of Defence in their
written replies has stated:
    ”As NPRR 2003 has been adopted by the Ministry of Defence, this
    policy also lays down the monitoring mechanism in Chapters VII
    and VIII. Chapter VII prescribes dispute redressal mechanism by
    a Committee chaired by Administrator of the project. The Ministry
    of Defence has no role to play in this. Chapter VII also lays down
    a grievance redressal cell under the chairmanship of Commissioner
    for R&R. Chapter VIII constitutes a National Level Monitoring
    Committee chaired by Secretary, Department of Land Resources,
    in which the Secretary of acquiring department is invited as one
    of the members. It is only at the National level that the Ministry
    of Defence is associated in monitoring.”
    2.103 The Ministry of Defence as per this three layered structure
would participate in monitoring at national level. When asked whether
the Ministry of Defence is considering to have a representative of
Defence Estate Office (DEO) in all the three levels, the Ministry of
Defence in their written reply has clarify that there is no role for the
Defence Estate Officers at any of the three layer monitoring mechanism.
Sharing of responsibility alongwith the State Government
    2.104 The Committee observe that prior to 2004, the Ministry of
Defence was paying rehabilitation grants to the concerned State
Governments as per their demands. Planning, acquisition and
monitoring of the rehabilitation projects was the sole responsibility
of the respective State Government. The Ministry of Defence was
not associated with the monitoring mechanism alongwith the State
Government. However, the Defence Estate Officer used to maintain
a constant liaison with the Collectors at the field level to see the
progress of land acquisition. The Committee further observe that in
many cases, the affected persons have not been resettled and
rehabilitated due to various reasons. As a result, cases are still going
on in various courts for years together.

    2.105 The Committee are distressed to note that the Ministry of
Defence was only concerned to maintain constant liaison with the
State Government authorities to see the progress of land acquisition
and not with the progress of rehabilitation and resettlement. The
Ministry of Defence left this crucial task at the mercy of the State
                                 46

Government. The Committee strongly feel that the acquiring agency
should not shift the total responsibility to the State Governments.
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of
Defence must ask the State Government to furnish regular feedback
in time and examine all the pending cases where people have not
been given their dues or where they have not been resettled or
rehabilitated and the accountability must be fixed. The Ministry
should also involve themselves with the State Government and solve
the old cases as part of their social obligation. In addition, the
Committee desire that a Floor Level Committee comprising a
representative of the Ministry of Defence, District Administration
(Collector) and affected persons may be constituted to oversee the
effective implementation of rehabilitation and resettlement, starting
from Gazette notification to actual rehabilitation and it should be
given a legal status. The Committee further desire that in the
comprehensive legislation on land acquisition, resettlement and
rehabilitation as proposed by the Committee in their earlier
paragraph, it should be taken care of. The Ministry of Defence should
delegate powers for monitoring the rehabilitation and ensure
accountability.

Grievance Redressal Cell

    2.106 The Committee observe that, at the higher level, as per
Para 7.2.1 of the National Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation,
the State Government shall constitute a Grievance Redressal Cell
under the Chairmanship of the Revenue Commissioner for
Resettlement and Rehabilitation for redressal of Grievances of the
project affected families. The aggrieved families may move a petition
to this Cell for redressal of their grievances. The form and manner
in which and the time within which the complaints may be made
to the Grievance Resressal Cell and disposed of, shall be prescribed
by the State Government.

    The Committee are distressed to note that the policy is silent in
regard to form and manner in which the complaints may be made
to the Grievance Redressal Cell and the time within which it will
be disposed of. Everything has been left to the whims and caprices
of the State Government. Therefore, the Committee desire that the
provision of the policy may be thoroughly reviewed and everything
should be specified in the policy itself in order to avoid ambiguity
and misinterpretation and the Grievance Redressal Cell should
include District Collector, representative of the Ministry of Defence
and a representative of the affected families.
                                 47

Involvement of the Ministry of Defence at all the levels of
monitoring mechanism.

    2.107 The Committee observe that, in the three-layer structure of
monitoring mechanism, the Ministry of Defence participates only at
the National Level. At the lower and the middle levels, the Ministry
of Defence does not have any role to play. The Committee are of
the strong view that, in order to ensure a meaningful rehabilitation,
a representative of Defence Estate Organisation should be made a
Member at all the levels of the monitoring mechanism.
                             CHAPTER III

  STATE-WISE STATUS OF LAND ACQUIRED, COMPENSATION
    PAID TO THE STATE GOVERNMENTS/FAMILIES, FUNDS
       UTILIZED AND PROGRESS OF REHABILITATION

     3.1 The Ministry of Defence acquired land for operational use of
Defence Forces and other defence purposes in almost all over India.
The compulsory acquisition of private lands for pubic purposes
including infrastructure projects displaces people from their ancestral
land forcing them to give up their home, assets and means of
livelihood. The land acquisition is done throughout the country under
the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 except in the State of Jammu & Kashmir.
In Jammu & Kashmir, the land is acquired under the Jammu & Kashmir
Land Acquisition Act, 1938.
    3.2 On being asked by the Committee, the State-wise detailed
information regarding total land acquired, number of villages displaced,
number of affected families, rehabilitation amount paid by the Ministry
of Defence to the State Governments, rehabilitation package provided
to the affected families, the Ministry of Defence in its written replies
submitted as under:
Andhra Pradesh
     3.3 In the State of Andhra Pradesh the Ministry of Defence is
acquiring the land for future requirements of the Navy for creating
alternative and additional facilities at district Vizag. The following are
the full details of the Naval Alternate OP Base:
Naval Alternate OP Base, District Vizag
    According to the Ministry of Defence, the Government of India
sanctioned this project on 28 March 2005 and total land acquired
measuring 4533.58 acres taken from four villages of district Vizag, out
of total land, private land is 1594.66 acres. 450 families are affected by
this project. The Ministry of Defence sanctioned payment of Rs. 47.04
crore for the acquisition of the land and the rehabilitation grant paid
to the affected families Rs. 10.05 crore.
Rehabilitation Package
   3.4 In regard to the rehabilitation package offered to the affected
families, the Ministry of Defence, in a written reply, submitted:
       (i) 30 acres will be acquired for resettlement in 4 villages in
           Rambilli and Rayvaram mandal;

                                   48
                                  49

      (ii) 5 acres will be acquired for community purpose: school,
           temple, hospital etc;
     (iii) Rs. 1 lakh per family for house reconstruction;
     (iv) Rs. 1 crore, reconstruction of schools, temples, cyclone
          shelters and community halls;
      (v) Rs. 1 crore for electricity, drinking water, culverts & roads;
     (vi) Rs. 1 crore for cattle sheds;
    (vii) Rs. 50 lakhs for milch cattle;
    (viii) Rs. 1 crore for vocational training;
     (ix) Landless labourers and artisans whose houses have been
          acquired in the village are provided with house sites of
          5 cents each irrespective of actual loss of the acquired house
          and also provided with an amount of Rs. 1,00,000 for the
          construction of New House in the allotted area; and
      (x) Award will be declared by consent.

    3.5 As regards the progress of the project, the Ministry of Defence
in its written replies stated:

   “An extent of 47.70 cents of land is required for rehabilitation of
   proposed 450 families of the villages of Velpugondupalom(v) of
   S. Rayavaram Mandal. So far, an extent of 41.70 acres has been
   identified at M. Chintuva(V) of Rambilli Mandal for rehabilitation.

   The Executive Engineer, Social Welfare, Visakhapatnam has prepared
   a lay out plan to rehabilitate 379 No. of family heads and 111 No.
   of major sons of the villages of Velpugondupalom(v) of Ramabilli
   Mandal and Pisinigottupalom, Devallapalom and Revuvathada(v)
   of S. Rayavaram Mandal.

   Further, an extent of 6.00 acres is additionally required to
   rehabilitate balance 71 family members for which private land has
   been identified at nearby layout and to be acquired and the layout
   to be prepared.

   As against the total allotment of Rs. 10.05 crores, initially
   administrative sanction has been accorded for an amount of
   Rs. 222.70 lakhs to take up the works in the 1st phase at the
   proposed rehabilitation site and the execution of works were
   entrusted to the Executive Engineer, Social Welfare Visakhapatnam.
   So far, an amount of Rs. 2.75 lakhs has been spent under Defence
                                  50

   Rehabilitation programme and an amount of Rs. 25.00 lakhs worth
   of works has been executed and the bills to be paid. The other
   works like buildings, water supply scheme are also under progress.”

    3.6 On being asked by the Committee, whether the Ministry of
Defence has ever specifically asked the State Government to provide
consent award for paying compensation to the oustees, the Ministry of
Defence in its written reply stated:

   “In project of land acquisition for Naval Alternate Operating Base,
   District Visakhapatnam, on the request of the State Government of
   Andhra Pradesh, the Ministry of Defence has agreed for a consent
   award. Project status is as under:

   Section 4(1) notification issued    : 14.8.2005 to 2.9.2005

   Section 6 declared issued           : 20.8.2005 to 9.9.2005

   Consent Award declared on 17.1.2006 at the rate of Rs. 3 lakh per
   acre.”

    3.7 When enquired about implementation/monitoring mechanism
of rehabilitation package to project affected families, the Ministry of
Defence in its written reply stated as under:

   “As far as the current acquisition projects are concerned they do
   not satisfy the criteria mentioned in NPRR 2003 for its applicability.
   The only project where R&R package has been sanctioned but
   does not come in ambit of NPRR 2003 is project of Naval Alternate
   Operating Base for Navy at Visakhapatnam. The implementation
   and monitoring of the rehabilitation work is being done by the
   State Government.”

    3.8 The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of Defence
has offered lucrative rehabilitation package of Rs. 10 crore to the
affected families whose land has been acquired by Navy at District
Vizag for creating alternative and additional facilities in
Visakhapatnam. This is the only project where RR Package has been
sanctioned but does not come in the ambit of NPRR. The
implementation and monitoring is being done by the State
Government.

    3.9 The Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of
Defence in active coordination with the State Government should
ensure that benefits of rehabilitation package offered by the Ministry
of Defence reach the targeted families in a time bound manner. The
                                   51

Committee also desire that Panchayat Samitis and Local Panchayat
may also be involved for proper and efficacious monitoring of the
progress of rehabilitation work being performed by the executing
authority. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress
made by the Government from time to time in this regard.
Bihar
     3.10 In the State of Bihar, Green Field Project has been undertaken
by Ordnance Factory Board at Rajgir, Nalanda for production of
Bi-modular Charge System (BMCS) for 155mm Gun System, Tank Gun
Ammunition, Bar Mine and 30mm Ammunition. The following are the
full details of Propellant Factory, Nalanda:
Propellant Factory, Nalanda
    The Government of India sanctioned Propellant Factory Project on
26.2.99 and total land acquired measuring 2534.1695 acres and
100 acres from the seven villages of district Rajgir. The total number
of affected families was 1191. The possession of these lands was handed
over to the Ministry of Defence in February 2001. A compensation of
Rs. 1.78 crores for acquisition of 100 acres and Rs. 7.68 crores paid by
Collector to DRDO for construction of 1212 houses.
   3.11 In regard to the rehabilitation package offered to the affected
families, the Ministry of Defence, in a written note, stated as under:
    “A sum of Rs. 9,46,00,00 was sanctioned by the Ministry of Defence
    and paid to the Government of Bihar as rehabilitation package,
    which included the amount required for acquisition cost of
    100 acres of land and for construction of houses under Indira
    Awas Scheme, roads, tubewells, primary health centers and schools,
    etc. for the project affected families. However, as there was no
    progress on rehabilitation, a decision was taken in a meeting
    between Secretary (DP&S) and Chief Secretary, Govt. of Bihar, on
    08.10.2003 in Patna that construction work of rehabilitation package
    shall be done by Ordnance Factory Board and Government of Bihar
    shall return the sum of Rs. 7.67 crores to Ordnance Factory Board,
    after subtracting the cost of land acquired for the rehabilitation of
    the affected families. The construction of houses would be
    undertaken by the DRDO. The rehabilitation work is expected to
    be completed by December 2005”.
Rehabilitation Package
   3.12 In regard to the rehabilitation package offered to the affected
families, the Ministry of Defence, in its written reply, stated as under:

        1. 1110 houses have been constructed. Sanitation and external
           electrification is the responsibility of the State Government.
                                   52
           Houses have been constructed by DRDO through Rajiv
           Gandhi Rural Housing Development Corporation, Karnataka.
           Each plot: 202.85 sq. meters House has latrine cum
           bathroom. (Village: Nagdi).
       2. Electricity will be provided by State Government about 90%
          of internet road network in the rehabilitation site has been
          completed. Sinking of 36 numbers of shallow tubewells out
          of 75 numbers has been completed.
       3. Most of the affected persons are engaged in construction
          work as labour for Ordnance Factory.

    3.13 On the question of periodic feedback from the State
Government pertaining to the progress of work relating to rehabilitation,
the Ministry of Defence in its written reply stated:

    “Periodical feedback is being received from State Governments
    pertaining to work relating to rehabilitation for Project Seabird
    and Project at Nalanda. For the other projects periodical feedback
    has not been received.”

    3.14 The Committee note that Government of India acquired the
total land measuring 2534 acres in 7 villages in Rajgir, Bihar for
propellant factory project for production of bi-modular charge system.
After possession of land, compensation/rehabilitation package was
offered to the affected families. Under this package DRDO has
constructed 1110 houses for the project affected families. The
Committee are however concerned to note that sanitation, external
electrification etc. are yet to be done by the Government of Bihar.
The Committee further note with concern that construction work of
rehabilitation which was the joint responsibility of Ordnance Factory
Board and Government of Bihar and was expected to be completed
by December 2005, has not been completed so far. Construction of
health centre, temples, community centres, park, school is yet to
commence. Further, electricity work and sinking of 36 number of
tubewells have not been completed.

    3.15 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
rehabilitation package offered to the affected families must be
suitable to them and it should be completed in a time bound manner,
without further delay, so that affected families may not be deprived
of their legitimate right to live in a dignified manner. The Committee
hope that there will not be any time and cost overrun in
implementation of rehabilitation package. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the progress made by the Government in this
regard.
                                    53

Himachal Pradesh

     3.16 In the State of Himachal Pradesh, the Ministry of Defence
acquired the land for establishing Army Project at District Averi. The
following are the full details viz. date of sanction of this project, total
land acquired, number of affected villages and persons, rehabilitation
amount paid to the affected families:

Army Project at Avery

    The Ministry of Defence in its written reply has stated:

    1. Government of India sanction                2.7.1991

    2. Total land                                  262.438 acres

    3. Area pvt. land                              262.438 acres

    4. Villages                                    1

    5. Possession taken                            18.12.1998

    6. Area acquired for rehabilitation            34.5416 acres

Rehabilitation Package

   3.17 In regard to the rehabilitation package offered to the affected
families, the Ministry of Defence, in a written reply, stated as under:

       1. Number of oustees : 149 (68 rehabilitated, 47 did not apply
          within prescribed time and 34 were not entitled as they
          had got compensation more than Rs. 5 lacs each). All the
          eligible oustees have been granted the land as per the
          provision of the rehabilitation scheme. However, the
          remaining oustees not covered in the scheme were asked to
          apply on lease basis but none have applied for the same.
       2. An oustee is one who owns a house site or agriculture
          land or both.
       3. An oustee who is a permanent resident of village given
          421.50 sq. metres.
       4. An oustee who is not permanent resident of village given
          210.75 sq. metres.
       5. Landless agricultural labourers, forest dwellers, artisans not
          provided with any benefits.
                                  54

    3.18 During the oral evidence, the Committee pointed out that in
Averi, 47 persons were not given the benefits as they did not apply
within time given to them as a result, no plots were allocated to
them. In this regard, the Ministry of Defence stated as under:

   “Instructions have been issued to the Principal Director, Western
   Command, Chandigarh, to take up the matter with Government
   of Himachal Pradesh to consider extending rehabilitation benefits
   to even these 47 persons who did not apply for rehabilitation
   benefits within time.”

    3.19 The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence acquired
the land in Himachal Pradesh for establishing Army Project at
District Averi. The Government of India sanctioned the Project on
2 July 1991. The Committee are concerned to note that out of
149 oustees, 68 were rehabilitated, 34 were not entitled as they had
got compensation of more than Rs. 5 lacs each and 47 were not
given benefits of rehabilitation as they did not apply within time
given to them and as a result no plots were allotted to them. Further,
the Committee are concerned to note that landless agricultural
labourers, forest dwellers, artisans were not provided with any
benefits of rehabilitation package.

    3.20 The Committee do not approve the manner, in which the
Ministry of Defence is handling the rehabilitation of the displaced
families and strongly recommend that Ministry of Defence should
take up the matter at highest level with the Government of Himachal
Pradesh for extending all rehabilitation benefits to even those
47 persons who did not apply for rehabilitation benefits within time
and also to landless agricultural labourers, artisans, forest dwellers,
etc. within six months of the presentation of this Report. The
Committee desire that deprived/affected families should be provided
compensation with interest for callous and inhuman approach of
Government towards their rehabilitation. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the progress made by the Government in this
regard.

Karnataka

    3.21 In the State of Karnataka, the Ministry of Defence sanctioned
in 1986, a new Naval Base under Project Seabird to meet the deficiency
in shore infrastructure anticipated changes in Naval strategy and to
remove congestion in existing Naval Bases. The scope of this project
comprised of (a) creation of operational Base facilities for vessels and
aircrafts; (b) dockyard for repair and refits of ships, submarines and
                                   55

yard crafts; and (c) building a yard for modernisation/conversion of
ships, submarines and other classified vessels. The following are the
full details of project i.e. total land acquired, private land, number of
affected families, rehabilitation amount etc.

Project Sea-Bird, Karwar

    The Ministry of Defence in its written replies stated that
Government of India sanctioned this project on 10 July, 1986 and total
lands measuring 10338 acres are acquired from the 13 villages of district
Karwar. Out of total land, 2412 acres is private land and 4032 families
were affected by this project. The possession of these lands is handed
over to the Ministry of Defence in 1988-2001. Rs. 126.96 crores was
sanctioned by the Government of India as rehabilitation amount.

    3.22 When enquired about the policy of Karnataka Government
regarding rehabilitation and resettlement, the Ministry of Defence in
its written reply stated:

    “There is no general policy for Rehabilitation and Resettlement in
    Karnataka. However, the Government of Karnataka has issued
    package programme for rehabilitation and resettlement of Seabird
    Project for project affected families of Seabird Project.”

Rehabilitation package

    3.23 The Ministry of Defence in its written replies stated that
rehabilitation package given to the project affected families as per
Memorandum of Understanding between Ministry of Defence,
Government of India and State Government of Karnataka are as under:

      (1) Rehabilitation Grant at the rate of Rs. 50,000 given to the
          project affected families.
      (2) House site i.e. 30' x 40'; 35' x 60'; 50' x 60'; 60' x 90'
          depending upon the category of the PDF in fully developed
          Rehabilitation Centres.
      (3) Rehabilitation grant given to children @ Rs. 70,000 each to
          two adult issues, either male or female, above 18 years of
          age as on 21.12.1997.
      (4) Rehabilitation grant i.e. Rs. 70,000 above 35 years of age
          given to unmarried daughter.
      (5) Transport grant i.e. Rs. 5000 given to project affected families
          at the time of evacuation.
                                     56

        (6) ITI training to one member from project affected families at
            the rate of Rs. 1,000 per month for 24 months.
        (7) Subsistence allowance at the rate of Rs. 2800 given to PAFs
            after evacuation.
        (8) Land for land to agriculturist families from 1 acre to 2.20
            acres.
        (9) Seven Rehabilitation Centres have been established for the
            Project Affected Families. The following infrastructure
            facilities have been provided in these centres:
            (i) Formation & Asphalting of roads.
           (ii) Drains, Water Supply.
           (iii) Street Lights & Electrification.
           (iv) School, Hospital, Post Office, Temple, Shopping Complex,
                Primary Health Centre, Community Toilets, Bus Shelter,
                Fish Market, Anaj Mandi, Anganwadi etc.
           (v) Total expenditure on providing infrastructure facilities
               in Rehabilitation Centres is Rs. 36.45 crore.

    3.24 As regard the details of compensation paid under the Act or
Statutory Rules before February 2004, the Ministry of Defence in its
written reply stated:

“Land Acquisition Payment
Total amount of compensation paid                   :   Rs. 25.37 crore
Year of award                                       :   1988
Average Compensation per guntha                     :   Rs. 510
Total families affected by land acquisition         :   4032
Rehabilitation Payment
Rehabilitation Grant @ Rs. 50,000 per PAF           :   Rs. 17.93 crore
Rehabilitation Grant for two adult children         :   Rs. 31.18 crore
Transportation and subsistence money                :   Rs. 1.56 crore
Cash-in-lieu of site                                :   Rs. 2.62 crore
Legal Heir Grants                                   :   Rs. 1.71 crore
Ex-gratia to settlers                               :   Rs. 1.74 crore
Total                                               :   Rs. 56.76 crore”
                                  57

    3.25 As regards the setting up of the State Level Coordination
Committee to monitor the progress of rehabilitation, the Ministry in
its written reply stated:

   “A State level Coordination Committee was set up by the
   Government of Karnataka to monitor the progress of the
   rehabilitation project. Officers of the Project Seabird and Ministry
   of Defence were also the members of this Committee.”

    3.26 During the study visit of the Committee to Karwar, the
Committee heard the grievances of the people like delay in construction
in Karwar particularly problems regarding employment for their
children, payment of grant of Rs. 70,000 to the children above the age
of 18. They informed that the basic amenities have not been provided
to them. They also suggested to the Committee that implementation
of rehabilitation process may be carried out by the district
Commissioner and may not be handed over to the panchayats.

    3.27 In a written memorandum submitted to the Committee by
displaced families at Karwar stated:

       1. Providing employment to each family.
       2. Relaxation of age limit for sanction of Rehabilitation Grant
          of Rs. 70,000.
       3. Compensation to Fishermen who have left their boats, net
          etc., during evacuation.
       4. Additional compensation of Rs. 1.25 lakhs.
       5. Providing stipend to ITI students.
       6. Provide fishing without any restrictions.
       7. Pension to aged people (above 60 years).
       8. Providing employment by setting up of small scale industries
          in rehabilitation centres.
       9. Sanction of Matsya Ashraya Houses.
      10. Settlers to be treated as PAFs.

    3.28 When asked by the Committee, the Ministry of Defence
furnished the point-wise factual comments as under:

      “1. This issue has not been included in the MoU. The Ministry
          of Defence and INS Kadamba have agreed that there would
          be preferential recruitment of the Project Affected Families
          when the recruitment for INS Kadamba takes place.
                                  58

       2. This was a decision taken in the MoU between the State
          Government and the Ministry of Defence.
       3. No such survey has taken place during that time. It would
          be impossible to accurately access the value of such losses
          at this point of time. Further, the Fisheries Harbour at
          Amadalli is being constructed for the use of the Fisherman
          who have been displaced by the Project.
       4. This is again over and above the MoU between State
          Government and the Ministry of Defence.
       5. The proposal for continuation of ITI for next 3 years has
          already been approved by the Seabird State Level
          Coordination Committee and will be implemented.
       6. The ban during the monsoon season is imposed to ensure
          that there is no indiscriminate fishing during the breeding
          season. For the fishermen of Uttara Kannada district, the
          ban was reduced by 15 days in the year 2005 on the request
          of the fishermen.
       7. There is no special pension scheme for age-old people, who
          have been displaced by the project. The regular age-old
          pension scheme who have attained the age of 65 years can
          be availed by the PAF’s.”

    3.29 Regarding the rehabilitation package to the Project Affected
Families at Karwar, the representatives of the Ministry of Defence
stated:

    “Regarding the Karwar project, I would also like to say that this
    package was arrived at after comprehensive and extensive
    discussions between the Ministry of Defence and the State of
    Karnataka. There was a mutual agreement, a sort of Memorandum
    of Understanding between the Government of India and the
    Government of Karnataka. So, that was decided and that is how
    this package, as you said, is actually a real rehabilitation
    programme which has taken place for which we have funded
    almost everything.”

    3.30 The Committee during the course of evidence desired to know
the action taken by the Ministry after the study visit of the Committee,
the representative of the Ministry of Defence stated as under:

    “There was a requirement which the Committee had brought about
    to give some momentum to the fishing harbour and to give
    permission for that area to be handed back to the fishermen for
                                  59

    developing their fishing community and to carry on their activities.
    That has been completed.”

    3.31 On a specific query on number of fishing boats provided, the
representative of Ministry of Defence stated that they were not provided
any fishing boats, as they had their own boats.

    3.32 During the oral evidence, when the Committee desired to
know the money package being provided by the Ministry, the
representative stated as under:

    “We were not providing any fishing boats to them. Money package
    has already been given to the State Government. An amount of
    Rs. 144 crore was the rehabilitation package.”

    3.33 As regards that fishing boat package and sanction of money
to the affected families the representative stated as under:

    “The dairy development sanction has been given. The fishing
    harbour was initially for Rs. 4 crore. It was enhanced to
    Rs. 8 crore. These are the two packages which have been finalised.”

    3.34 The Committee note that in spite of the fact that Government
of Karnataka has not formulated general policy of Rehabilitation
and Resettlement, the Ministry of Defence has offered appreciable
rehabilitation package for the Project Seabird to the affected families
as per the Memorandum of Understanding signed between the
Ministry of Defence and State Government of Karnataka.

    3.35 The Committee during the visit to the Karwar Project,
however, found that certain basic facilities like drinking water, proper
education and employment are still to be extended to the affected
families. The affected families were not satisfied with the amount
given by the Government for construction of houses. Further,
demands about age relaxation in employment, training to young boys
have not been acceded to and fishing facilities are yet to be provided
by the Ministry of Defence. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that grievances of the affected families may be addressed by the
Ministry of Defence sympathetically to rehabilitate them properly.

Maharashtra

National Defence Academy, Khadakwasala, Pune

   3.36 Pursuant to the Government decision of 1945 to set up a
Defence academy in Pune, the Government of Bombay informed the
War Department of Government of India that land required for the
proposed War Academy at Khadakwasala would be acquired by the
                                  60
Government of Maharashtra and given free of cost to the Government
of India. Subsequently, Government of Maharashtra acquired land
measuring 6715 acres, 24 gunthas and 8 annas from the villages of
Kudje, Ahire, Kpare, Shivane and Kondhave Dhavade as per awards
declared on various dates from 22/3/1950 to 9/2/1953. The possession
of these lands was handed over to the Ministry of Defence on various
dates from 28/11/1949 to 26/03/1953. A compensation of Rs. 27,99,803
was paid by the State Government to the land owners. The National
Defence Academy was set up in 1952.

    3.37 Though land measuring 12.34 acres of Ahire village was
acquired in the said acquisition, its possession was not handed over to
the Ministry of Defence as it was inhabitated by villages. It was agreed
by the Government of Maharashtra that they would shift the villagers
from the acquired lands for NDA to an alternative site in due course
of time provided the cost of shifting/rehabilitation was borne by the
Ministry of Defence. This issue remained under consideration for some
time. In 1990, Ministry of Defence sanctioned payment of
Rs. 47.49 lakhs to the State Government and also sanctioned transfer
of 65 acres of defence land to the State Government. Out of this
65 acres, 20 acres has been transferred to the State Government on
payment of Rs. 2.5 lakhs by the State Government.

    3.38 The Committee during the evidence were given to
understand that Ministry of Defence has acquired land more than
the actual requirement for the project executed by it and no decision
has been taken so far to return the unutilized/excess land to the
farmers for their use. Looking into the past experience that acquired
defence land remained unutilized for decades together, the Committee
desire that Government should set up a Committee to review the
total land acquired by Ministry of Defence, utilisation and actual
requirement thereof and possibility of productive use of unutilized
land by the local persons/farmers. The Committee may be apprised
about the progress made by the Government in this regard.

Talegaon Dabhade

    3.39 On being asked by the Committee reasons for choosing a
commercial area in Talegaon Dabhade, Tal, Mawal, District Pune, for
a sensitive missile project instead of under developed area, or an
interior area, the Ministry of Defence in its written reply stated:

   “Selection of site was based on the recommendations of a board
   of Officers in consideration of technical/scientific parameters
   governing the purpose for which site is to be used. Care was
   taken to see that no-commercial land is acquired in Talegaon
   Dabhade, Tal, Mawal, District Pune.”
                                  61

    3.40 On being asked by the Committee, whether the Government
can go for any package while acquiring the land for defence purposes,
during the oral evidence, the representative of Government of
Maharashtra stated:

   “At Talegoan Dabhade, in 2002 190 hectares of land was notified
   for acquisition for Defence projects. People were opposing and
   there were a lot of strikes and protests. It is because previously
   from the same village 1,000 acres of land was acquired for defence
   purpose. We had series of meetings with the people, with the
   people’s representatives that is MLAs. Finally, a package was sorted
   out with the consent of the people and people who were opposing
   the project. They had handed over the land with the consent and
   we have also paid them the acquisition price. In addition to that,
   certain package has been recommended to the Government of India.
   While recommending that package, certain aspects were discussed
   with the people that under the Maharashtra Project Affected Persons
   Rehabilitation Act if the land is acquired for any irrigation project
   or for similar other projects, certain land is given to each project
   affected person. They are also allotted plots and are given some
   amount of money for construction of houses and for other
   amenities.”

    3.41 As regards the proposal of rehabilitation package, he further
stated:

   “In one village Talegaon Dabhade in Pune, the rehabilitation
   package has been proposed. It consists of the cost of land
   acquisition. It is Rs. 5.5 crore per hectare. The job should be given
   to one person from each family and the basic amenities in the
   new village. This is the only proposal and it is yet to be approved
   by the Army.”

    3.42 The Committee note that at Talegaon Dabhade in the State
of Maharashtra, 190 hectares of land was notified for acquisition for
Defence Project in 2002. The Committee are happy to note that in
spite of initial resistance by the local people, the Ministry of Defence
through reconciliation/consent, paid them acquisition price, and now
rehabilitation package has been proposed. The Committee are of the
firm view while rehabilitation packages are offered to the affected
families, Government must also apply provisions of Maharashtra
Project Affected Persons Rehabilitation Act, so that in addition to
National Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation 2003, other
benefits may also be extended to them. The Committee further desire
                                    62

that the Ministry of Defence may approve this proposal as early as
possible. The Committee hope that after approval of the proposal,
Government will execute the project in a time bound manner. The
Committee also desire that the Ministry of Defence and Government
of Maharashtra must follow flexible and humanitarian approach in
handling cases of rehabilitation.

Acquisition during Second World War

    3.43 From the State Government of Maharashtra six memoranda
were received in respect of four villages involved in the acquisition of
land for restoration of acquired land for rehabilitation of the displaced
persons.

      (a) In 1943 Government requisitioned land in villages Ambad,
          Dadhegaon, Nandur Bahulla, Aswali Bahula, Taluk & district
          Nasik.
      (b) Villagers were forcibly asked to vacate their houses being
          poor.
      (c) It was acquired in 1952 permanently.
      (d) All such affected people are living in horrible conditions.
      (e) Affected people should be provided pieces of land for
          residences.
      (f) No rehabilitation compensation has been given.
      (g) Lands are presently of no use to Army Department and
          should be returned to land owners.
      (h) Lands have been transferred to Military department without
          authority.

    3.44 When asked the details of compensation under the relevant
Act or Statutory Rules before February, 2004, the Ministry in its written
reply submitted as under:

    “A number of villages Nandur Bahula, Aswali-Bahula, Dadhegaon
    and Ambad Budruk including 13 other villages were requisitioned
    during the year 1942-43. These were subsequently acquired during
    1950-52 for Artillery Ranges Deolali. Acquisition of land for Artillery
    Ranges at Deolali being very old (1950-52), all records are not
    available. However, available records reveal that Government of
    India, Ministry of Defence allotted an amount of Rs. 1,28,56,364
    vide letter No. 60140/Q3H/1900SD (Q&ENG) dated 15/12/1952.
                                 63

   A statement has been located showing the progress awards
   payment of final acquisition cost of lands for Artillery ranges Area
   Deolali for the period from 1/2/1957 to 28/2/1957. There are 17
   villages involved in acquisition of land for Artillery Ranges
   involving a sum of Rs. 1,01,55,871. Total payment made by SLAO
   as on 4/4/1957 is Rs. 84,13,654.50 and undisbursed amount
   Rs. 17,42,316.

   This statement also indicates sanctioned amount Rs. 4,90,031.10 for
   (I.A.F.) U.E.D. and 8,750 for extension to runway at Deolali.

   It is also added that Government of India Ministry of Defence vide
   letter No. 5204/1/Acq./LH&D dated 3/5/1955 issued sanction for
   part payment in respect of eight villages (out of seventeen) i.e.
   Bhagur, Lahavit, Lohoshingve, Dedhegaon, Rahur Bahula,
   Pimpalgaon Khamb, Gonde and Ambad Budruk.

      Village-wise details of payment as per available records are as
   under:

   1.   Nandur Bahula Rs. 14,58,799
        (2298 Acres-2 Guntas)

   2.   Aswali Bahula Rs. 650,460
        (3201 Acres-35 Guntas-12 Anas)

   3.   Dadhegaon Rs. 2,59,271
        (433 Acres-39 Guntas)
        As per Government sanction dated 3.5.1955

   4.   Ambad Budruk Rs. 21,52,967
        (4879 Acres-25 Guntas-12 Anas)
        As per Government sanction dated 3.5.1955”.

    3.45 On being asked how to deal with old cases, identification of
displaced persons and possibility to provide basic amenities and
rehabilitation benefits in this regard the Secretary, Government of
Maharashtra stated as under:

   “The experience varies from one district to another and also it has
   a lot to do with the dimension of the project. In respect of two
   projects which are coming up now, there we are proposing to
   implement a rehabilitation package. But in many projects which
   date back to 1950s or 1960s, no rehabilitation package has been
   implemented. The people have just been given the cost of the
   land, but we have not provided them the basic amenities or may
                                   64

    be new villages. We do not have much information on the state of
    the people who are displaced by the defence projects. On the two
    projects which are coming up now, we are now going through
    this process more diligently. We are talking to the people and we
    are developing the rehabilitation package. I will invite the Collector
    Pune to give specific information on the projects that are going on
    in Pune District.”

    3.46 During the oral evidence, the Committee pointed out that if
the Government conduct the survey to identify the displaced families,
can the Government give justice to all the displaced families, in this
regard, the representative of Government of Maharashtra stated:

    “We can definitely provide them many benefits in terms of the
    plots in the new villages, civil amenities, training for self-
    employment as a group. However, we would like to strike a note
    of caution that we may not extend it to the land acquisition.”

    3.47 The representatives of Government of Maharashtra have
informed the Committee that for providing all the basic amenities to
the affected families the State Government has decided to set up a
State Rehabilitation Authority. The State Government also decided to
set up three Grievance Redressal Mechanisms at Aurangabad, Pune
and Nagpur for affected families. If the grievances are not redressed
by the Collector and the Commissioner, they have a right to appeal.
The Grievance Redressal mechanism would look into all such cases
and the order passed by the Grievance Redressal Mechanism would
be binding upon the Collector and the Commissioner.

    3.48 On being asked by the Committee, on negotiation and
finalisation of all the court cases which are pending in the Maharashtra,
the representative of Government of Maharashtra stated:

    “The Fast Track Courts are to be set up at the Divisional level. In
    every Division, we can think of setting up a Fast Track Court
    where the land acquisition could be brought up. It has the
    advantage that we can monitor these cases more effectively and
    we can have special lawyers for this purpose.”

    3.49 The representative of Government of Maharashtra also
informed the Committee that land acquired for industrial purpose,
certain purpose have been made for negotiation of price under the
Maharashtra Industrial Act. In this Act, the Collector have empower
to negotiate with the farmers and he could fix and enhance
compensation with the consent of farmers.
                                  65
    3.50 During the study visit of the Committee to Nasik, the
Committee found that civic amenities were not provided to the project
affected families. The Committee were of the view that if rehabilitation
package was not implemented properly then person/authority should
be made accountable for this.

    3.51 The Committee note that Government requisitioned land of
the four villages i.e. Ambad Budruk, Dadhegaon, Nandur Bahulla,
Aswali Bahula, Taluk and District Nasik in 1943 and these were
subsequently acquired during 1950-52 for Artillery Ranges Deolali.
The Committee further note that people have been given the cost of
the land only and they have not been provided rehabilitation
package, basic amenities, on account of difficulty to identify them.
The Committee desire that Government should conduct a survey to
identify the displaced families and extend all possible benefits of
rehabilitation in terms of allotment of plot in new villages, civic
amenities, training for self-employment as a group in the form of
special rehabilitation package.

    3.52 The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Collector of the
Government of Maharashtra for setting up fast Track Court at the
divisional level and three Grievance Redressal mechanism for affected
families at Aurangabad, Pune and Nagpur. The Committee hope that
this will facilitate in reducing pending cases over the years and
ensure timely benefits to the affected families. The Committee desire
that State Government instead of filing appeal against the decision
of Fast Track Court should prefer to have reconciliation with the
affected families in order to avoid long delay in litigation and to
give better rehabilitation package to them. The Committee desire
that all basic amenities be provided to the project affected families
in a time bound manner and accountability for delay in execution
of rehabilitation project be fixed.

Orissa

Ordnance Factory, Project Badmal, Bolangir

    3.53 Green Field Project has been undertaken by Ordnance Factory
Board at Badmal for filling assembly and packing of high/middle
calibre ammunition and mines.

    3.54 When enquired about what criteria are adopted by Government
to select Green Field Project, the Ministry of Defence in its written
reply has stated as under:

   “The following major criteria have been examined/adopted for
   selection of project:

      (a) Safety, security and climatic conditions;
                                  66

      (b) Adequate availability of land for factory, township, safety
          buffer zone with scope for future expansion;
      (c) Availability of sufficient water and power sources;
     (d) Availability of communication system i.e. Rail and Road;
      (e) Geographical features, soil and terrain conditions;
      (f) To affect minimum agriculture land and displaced persons;
          and
      (g) To develop the backward and non-industrial area.”

     3.55 When the Committee desired to know the details of sanction
of project and land acquired for this project, the Ministry of Defence
in its written replies stated that Government of India sanctioned this
project on 10 December 1984 and 10 October 2002 and total land
measuring 3060.84 acres. The possession of the land was handed over
to the Ministry of Defence between 9 December 1985 to 2 June 1992.

Rehabilitation package

   3.56 On being asked by the Committee regarding the rehabilitation
package offered to the affected families in Bolangir, the Ministry of
Defence, in a written reply, stated as under:

   “During establishment of Ordnance Factory Badmal project at
   Orissa, an amount of Rs. 202.10 lakhs was paid to the District
   Authorities for:

      (i) Rehabilitation of 1030 Land displaced Persons (LDPs)/
          families (Rs. 140.80 lakhs)
      (ii) Electrification of LDP colonies (Rs. 25.00 lakhs) and
     (iii) Capsule training to LDPs in ITI, Bolangir (Rs. 36.30 lakhs)
   The rehabilitation package for LDPs consists of construction of
   houses with provision of tube wells, primary school, high school,
   community centre, health centre etc.

   983 LDPs were given employment in the factory. Cases for
   recruitment of other 47 LDPs are under various stages of scrutiny.

   Age relaxation of 10 years was granted apart from granting one
   time relaxation of education qualification from Class VIII pass to
   Class V in case of Durwans & Fireman and from Class V to literate
   in case of Labour Unskilled for providing employment to LDPs.”
                                   67

    3.57 The project affected families in response to the query of the
Committee on employment given by the Government to the project
affected families stated that for Ordnance factory at Badmal, district
Bolangir Orissa, total 1030 families surrendered their land. As per terms
and conditions, Ordnance factory Board promised to give employment
to one person from each family. However, during 21-22 years they
have not been given any employment, in this regard, the Ministry of
Defence has stated in its written reply:

    “In respect of Ordnance Factory Bolangir, out of 1030 land displaced
    family, 994 persons have been given employment. Employment
    could not be offered to balance 36 numbers due to lack of
    documentary evidence.”

    3.58 During the oral evidence of the representative of Government
of Orissa has stated that in Bolangir, the State Government is not
getting the support from the Ordnance Factory authorities for sorting
out problems. The General Manager, Ordnance Factory has never
attended any sitting of the Monitoring Committee. In this regard, the
Ministry of Defence in its written reply has stated:

    “Rehabilitation of land displaced persons was monitored by co-
    ordination and Monitoring Committee in Meetings held at District
    office Bolangir/Ordnance Factory Bolangir under the Chairmanship
    of Collector, Bolangir with local MLA and other district officials.”

   3.59 Regarding the rehabilitation package, the representative of the
Ministry of Defence stated:

    “The rehabilitation package normally forms part of the plan project.
    It is done in consultation with the State Governments. Whatever
    the State Governments demand, after scrutiny, that particular
    portion is included in the project report for sanction. Whatever
    sanction is required, it is given. This is the total status of the
    resettlement of the displaced persons in the Ordnance Factory of
    Badmal.”

    3.60 When enquired about the Resettlement and Rehabilitation
Policy of the Government of Orissa, the representative of Government
of Orissa stated as under:

    “The Government of India had handed down a model National
    Policy for Resettlement and Rehabilitation of the displaced persons.
    It is called Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy, 2003. It was
    notified in January, 2004. Much before that we had a number of
                               68

policies in our States. Even the R&R Policy of 1997 for the Kalinga
Nagar is much superior to the model policy which was given by
the Government of India in 2003.

Now there is a Group of Ministers appointed by the Hon’ble Chief
Minister which is looking into the R&R issues and they are drafting
a new R&R Policy which we call the Draft R&R Policy, 2006. We
have already circulated it. It is also available at the website of the
State Government. It is further improvement of R&R Policy 1997.
For the mining projects and industries. It has got many special
features which are there in the national policy. The national policy
is not applicable if the number of displaced families is less than
500 in the case of non-tribals and less than 250 in the case of
tribals. But our policy is applicable even if there are ten people
who are displaced. In the 1997 policy, apart from giving whatever
compensation is admissible to the displaced families under the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894, a Central Act, we are also giving
additionally some other things like home State land. We also give
almost the assurance for employment. We also allow the poor
landless people who are encroaching Government land even if it
is a forest land, some compensation. Similarly, in addition to
whatever is admissible under the Land Acquisition Act, we are
also giving ex-gratia of Rs. 25,000 per acre. If the cost of land is
Rs. 50,000 we also give another Rs. 25,000 as per the Land
Acquisition Act, to the displaced family. Again, our definition of
family is also larger as compared to other States’ and Government
of India’s definition of family. We have provided that major married
son will be a separate family. Similarly, a daughter in the family
who is more than 30 year will be treated as a separate family. She
will be given a plot of land, house and employment.

If you look at the package which is prepared by the Government
of Orissa, it is good. Unfortunately, since it does not have any
sanction of law or any force of authority, many industries are not
going by the policy of the State Government. Many of such
industries are also state Owned Undertakings like Coalfields India
Limited, Nalco, NTPC, Rourkela Steel Plant. They do not go by
the State Policy regarding R&R. In this regard, we have had a
number of discussions, personally spoke to the authorities a number
of times. They only promised that the matter would be taken up
at the level of the Ministry, at the level of the Government of
India and that they would come back.”
                                  69

    3.61 The Committee note that rehabilitation package proposed to
the affected families in Bolangir Project at Orissa, though good on
paper, has not been implemented in letter and spirit. The Committee
are pained to note that even after lapse of more than 20 years of the
sanction of the project, rehabilitation of the affected, illiterate and
poor families has not been done by the Ministry of Defence and
State Government and they are living in a miserable condition. The
affected poor families were not informed of the quantum of
compensation paid to them and have been deprived of the basic
facilities namely education, health, drinking water, jobs etc. More
surprising fact is that State Government does not have any
Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy for the affected families,
whose land has been acquired.

    3.62 As regards the employment guarantee to the land displaced
persons, the Committee are further pained to note that out of 1030
land displaced persons, 36 have still not been provided jobs so far
despite the then Prime Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi’s assurance on
29 October, 1984 in this regard.

    3.63 As regards, the monitoring of rehabilitation progress, the
Committee hold the view that the State Government of Orissa as
well as the Ordnance Factory Management are responsible for not
sorting out the grievances of the land displaced families. Even the
General Manager, Ordnance Factory has never attended any sitting
of the Monitoring Committee.

     3.64 The Committee, therefore, conclude that in Bolangir
Rehabilitation Project, neither the Centre nor State Government is
serious to rehabilitate the affected families, with the result that the
poor persons are being deprived of their rights and forced to live in
deplorable condition without the basic facilities like education,
health, drinking water and employment. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that Government must set up a high level
Committee to look into all the Resettlement and Rehabilitation works
being executed in the Bolangir District for the project affected
families. The Committee also desire that Ministry must ensure that
sitting of the Monitoring Committee be held regularly as per schedule
and its officers should attend it scrupulously irrespective of their
ranks and their designations and the matter of not attending the
Monitoring Committee Meeting by the General Manager, Ordnance
Factory be taken up at the highest level in order to give relief and
extend possible rehabilitation facilities to the poor land displaced
families. The Committee earnestly desire that the Ministry of
                                   70

Defence, Command Officers of Army and the State Government
officials must cooperate with the land displaced families and treat
them sympathetically.

Rajasthan

Mahajan Field Firing Range, Bikaner

    3.65 The Government of India sanctioned this project on
2 November 1982 and total land acquired measuring 3,32,985 acres
and out of the total land about 1,25,035.70 acres was private land. The
possession of the land handed over to the Ministry of Defence in
1987. The land acquired from the 33 villages of district Bikaner and
3256 families were affected by this project. Rs. 89.54 lakhs were paid
to the project affected families as rehabilitation amount and
compensation amount @Rs. 2750 paid to per person as per High Court’s
order.

    3.66 On being asked by the Committee, regarding necessity to
acquire Mahajan Ranges, when 300 Kms away is a larger range in
Pokhran where the testing and exercises are continuing on a larger
scale, the representative of the Ministry of Defence stated are as under:

    “The Ministry of Defence is dependent on the requirements of the
    Armed Forces. The requirement of the Armed Forces is there and
    we cannot meet all the requirements substantially. In fact, a larger
    number of testing has to be done in different places which we are
    not able to meet. Therefore, you would know ever for Chandipur
    on sea, certain testing is being done in the sea. What I humbly
    submit is that the Armed Forces are not lavish with their
    requirements. In fact, they need land for these kinds of exercises.
    They do require a lot of land and a lot of areas.”

Rehabilitation package

   3.67 In regard to the rehabilitation package offered to the affected
families, the Ministry of Defence, in a written reply, stated as under:

       1. Agriculture land measuring 1,08,316 acres allotted.
       2. Three new villages created for resettlement.
            (i) Ram Nagar
            (ii) Krishna Nagar
         (iii) Kumbhan bass
         (iv) Resettled in 6 other villages
                                  71

      3. Villages have primary and secondary schools, metalled road,
         water reservoir, health centre, veterinary hospital and
         community centre. (allotted plots of sizes : 60' x 90' plot)
      4. Scheme implemented as follows: Residential plots given
         between 1986-87, Provision of community oriented benefits
         on going.

   3.68 On being asked by the Committee, whether rehabilitation
amount was demanded by Rajasthan Government, the Ministry of
Defence in its written reply has stated:

   “For Mahajan Field Firing Ranges, private land with an area of
   1,25,035.70 acres was acquired and the awarded cost was
   Rs. 64.11 crore. Rehabilitation amount of Rs. 89.54 lakh was also
   paid. Before the acquisition of this Field Firing Range, a number
   of high level meetings took place between the Ministry of Defence
   and Rajasthan Government. From the perusal of the record of these
   meetings the following facts emerge:

     (a) The Collector had estimated the market value of land as
         Rs. 500/bigha, while the Ministry of Defence had estimated
         the price of land as Rs. 300/bigha. In spite of this variation
         in the estimates of land prices, the villagers were paid within
         a price range of Rs. 700/Bigha (minimum) and Rs. 1000/
         Bigha (maximum).
     (b) The State Government of Rajasthan had also requested
         Government of India to bear the consequential expenditure
         involved not only in the acquisition of existing lands and
         building but also for development of new lands for abadi,
         agricultural and pasturage purposes, and extending financial
         assistance to displaced persons to help commence
         agricultural and animal husbandry operations.
     (c) However, later in a meeting dated 29.1.81, the following
         decisions were taken:
         (i) Defence Ministry would not be involved in the
             mechanics of rehabilitation, and it was suggested to make
             payment of lump-sum to the State Governments for the
             purpose. It was agreed that only families whose
             homesteads would be acquired would be considered for
             computing this amount.
                                   72

          (ii) It was decided that Defence Ministry will pay a lump-
               sum to the State Government towards the cost of
               rehabilitation. The amount will be calculated @ Rs. 2,500
               per displaced family.
      (d) Later on, after a decision of High Court of Rajasthan dated
          18.10.05, the Ministry of Defence paid Rs. 2750 per family.”
    3.69 The Committee are constrained to note that a meagre amount
of Rs. 2750 per family was given to displaced persons in Mahajan
Field Firing Range Project, Rajasthan in consultation with the State
Government. The Committee fail to understand how with such a
meagre amount the rehabilitation of displaced families will be done.
The Committee, keeping in view the better rehabilitation packages
provided by the Ministry of Defence under Project Seabird, strongly
desire that in Mahajan Field Firing Range, Rajasthan, also, the
Ministry of Defence should offer a good rehabilitation package,
containing basic facilities, namely, housing, education, health and
employment to the affected families to enable them to live in a
dignified manner. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry
of Defence and the Government of Rajasthan should make joint
efforts in order to ensure better and timely completion of
rehabilitation of the displaced persons/families. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress made by the Ministry in
this regard.
Tamil Nadu
    3.70 In the State of Tamil Nadu, the Ministry of Defence acquired
the land for the following projects:
Naval Air Station, Arakonam
    3.71 The Ministry of Defence in its written replies stated that
Government of India sanctioned this project on 27 June 1986 and again
on 26 March 1990 and total land acquired measuring 1242.55 acres
were acquired from the seven villages of district Arakonam. Out of
total land 911.52 acres is private land. The possession of the land was
handed over to the Ministry of Defence in 1987-88. The Ministry of
Defence sanctioned payment of Rs. 2.97 crores to the State Government
for acquisition of land measure 911.52 acres Rehabilitation amount of
Rs. 0.29 crores. Total number of families was 89, out of this, 52 families
in private land and 37 families in State Government land.
Rehabilitation package
   3.72 In regard to the rehabilitation package offered to the affected
families, the Ministry of Defence, in a written reply, stated as under:
       1. A sum of Rs. 29.59 lakhs was demanded by the State
          Government for rehabilitation of 52 families in private land
          and 37 families in State Government land.
                                  73

       2. 52 dwelling houses were built at a cost of Rs. 7500 per
          family in the land allotted by the State Government and
          named as New Silver Pet Colony. Cost Rs. 3,90,000.
       3. 37 families who were in State Government Poramoke land
          were given a sum of Rs. 500 per family as displacement
          allowances. Cost Rs. 18,500.
       4. Provision of potable water and street light to the newly
          created Colony. Cost Rs. 50,000.

    3.73 During the oral evidence of the Collector, Vellore had informed
the Committee that out of 940 cases of land acquisition, in 849 cases
original petitions were filed and sub-court had rewarded enhanced
compensation in 603 cases. Naval authorities instead of paying them
enhanced compensation had preferred appeal against the judgement.

    3.74 During the oral evidence, the Committee pointed out that has
there been any other consulting procedure or negotiation with the
land owners by the Naval authorities, the non-official witness stated:—

   “With regard to out of court settlement, I would submit that if the
   Government comes forward with a generous heart and an open
   mind, we are prepared to sit and negotiate with them. We can
   even ask our colleagues to withdraw cases because we are in a
   pathetic situation. There are people who had small landholding
   and for the past 15 years, they have not been provided
   employment. So, they are moving out of station. They go out of
   station. They go to urban centres and work like migrated labour.
   We are in a pitiable condition. All these families should be called
   and naval authorities should be called and the matter should be
   settled, but nobody is listening.”

    3.75 The Committee note that there are a number of land
acquisition cases pending for enhanced compensation and non-
payment in various courts of Tamil Nadu for more than 20 years.
The Committee further note that State Government has not initiated
efforts for reconciliation with the affected families.

    3.76 The Committee in order to reduce growing litigation on
acquisition of land and non-payment of enhanced compensation
recommend that Naval Authorities and District Collectors should
make sincere efforts for reconciliation to settle the matter out of
court. For this purpose, all concerned authorities should sit together
and work out better packages for the affected families within six
months in view of the sufferings of the affected families. The
                                    74

Committee stress that Government should follow a humanitarian
approach towards the affected families as they have lost their land
and livelihood.

Air Force Station, Tanjore

    3.77 The Ministry of Defence in its written replies stated that private
land measuring 628.54 hectares (1553.12 acres) at four villages namely
Nanjikottai, Vallundambattu, Pillayapattu and Inayathkampatty located
at Taluka and District Tanjore (Thanjavur) was acquired in the year
1994 at sanctioned cost of Rs. 4,80,82,078 for Air Force Station Tanjore.
The possession of land was taken over on various dates between 1994
and 2000.

    3.78 During the oral evidence before the Committee, the District
Collector of Tanjore stated about the land acquisition at District Tanjore
as under:

    “In Thanjavur, the Air Force station was originally used during
    the Second World War. Subsequently, in 1989, this was acquired
    by the Indian Air Force. Initially, it was 181.6 hectares and in the
    period 1991-1995, we had acquired 628.61 hectares of patta land
    along with 61 hectares of purambok land and handed over to the
    Air Force. These were totally agricultural lands and these were
    only fields. No habitation was affected in the process. In fact, the
    adjacent habitation was totally avoided. These were handed over
    to the Navy. At that point of time, except for the compensation for
    the land acquired, no other type of rehabilitation had taken place”.

    3.79 On being asked by the Committee regarding the rehabilitation
package to the project affected families, the Ministry of Defence in its
written replies stated that in this acquisition scheme no rehabilitation
scheme was envisaged, as there was no such demand from the State
Government.

    3.80 On being asked by the Committee about the commitment
made at the time of land acquisition at Tanjore District, the District
Collector, Tanjore stated as under:—

    “At that time no commitment was made. These were only dry
    lands and there was no assured source of irrigation. Most of the
    landowners were small and marginal farmers and they were
    working as agricultural labourers. They went to the adjacent villages
    for their work. So, their livelihood was not much affected but they
    are very much interested in getting the enhanced compensation.”
                                    75

    3.81 During the oral evidence, the District Collector of Tanjore also
informed the Committee that Air Force Station, Tanjore is now going
for additional acquisition.

    3.82 On being asked by the Committee about the developing of
rehabilitation package for new acquisition, the District Collector, Tanjore
stated as under:—

    “This is another 53 hectares of agricultural land and 10 hectares
    and with the habitation of 120 families. To rehabilitate these
    120 families, we have identified land for 3.25 hectares, wherein we
    will be building houses for them. This village has 120 families
    with houses…. This package is including all the break ups, the
    cost of land comes to Rs. 5.8 crore.”.

    3.83 In a written memorandum submitted to the Committee by
the non-official witness has stated that his land was acquired for Air
Force Station, Tanjore more than 13 years back. He has not got the
enhanced compensation. He further stated that the Tehsildar and DEO
Chennai were threatening to prefer appeals and in some cases matter
has also been taken to the Supreme Court of India. He also requested
to redress his grievances.

    3.84 The above memorandum was sent to the Ministry of Defence
for their comments. The Ministry of Defence stated:

    “The Department filed an appeal against the order of sub-Court
    regarding enhancement of land value in High Court, Chennai
    (Madurai Branch) which is yet to be decided.”

    3.85 The Committee are pained to note that displaced families
relating to the Air Force Station, Tanjore were not given
rehabilitation, as the Government of Tamil Nadu did not demand
any Rehabilitation Package from the Ministry. Further, the State
Government preferred appeal against the enhanced compensation
award declared by the lower Court in favour of the displaced
families. The Committee take a strong objection to the way of
working and approach of the Ministry of Defence and State
Government in handling the case of paying compensation and
extending rehabilitation package to the displaced families. The
Committee are not inclined to accept the reasons forwarded by the
Ministry that rehabilitation package was not offered to the displaced
families as the State Government did not demand for it. It shows
that the Ministry of Defence, somehow, wants to escape from its
responsibility to rehabilitate the displaced families. The Committee
                                  76

strongly recommend that the Ministry of Defence and State
Government should change their mind set and compensate all the
aggrieved families because it is the social and legal responsibility of
the Government in a democratic country like India.

    3.86 The Committee, keeping in view the deplorable situation of
the displaced families at Tanjore, strongly recommend that the
Ministry of Defence should immediately offer a better rehabilitation
package to the affected families, whose land has been acquired by
the Government without rehabilitation package. The Committee also
recommend that the Ministry of Defence and representatives of the
State Government, instead of preferring appeal against the enhanced
award declared by the Court, should come forward for negotiations/
reconciliation with the displaced families with a food offer of
compensation. The Committee stress that the Government should
follow a humanitarian approach towards the affected families, as
they have lost their land and livelihood for the noble cause of the
nation.

Delhi

    3.87 In a written memorandum submitted to the Committee by
non-official witness has stated that the Army is taking action under
the provision of Public Premises Eviction Act to evict the squatters,
who are in occupation of the land for over the last 90 years. The
petitioner has alleged illegal and high-handed action by the Army in
removing these encroachers. They also stated that the agreement
between Defence Authorities and Ramjas Foundation be honoured.

    3.88 The above memorandum was sent to the Ministry of Defence
for their comments. In this regard the Ministry has commented as
under:—

   “In this regard, it is submitted that the land at Anand Parbat was
   initially requisitioned in 1942-43 and subsequently acquired during
   1952-53, under the provisions of Defence of India Act. There were
   some encroachments in the area, which existed since long. During
   a recent demarcation and survey of the area, jointly with the Civil
   Revenue Authorities, these encroachments came to the notice of
   the Army and they have initiated action for eviction of the
   encroachers”.

   3.89 During the oral evidence, the Committee pointed out that a
few barracks are not handed over as per the agreement and the action
                                  77

taken by the Ministry taken in this regard, the representative of
Ministry of Defence stated as under:—

   “The report, which has come from the Army says that there is not
   such agreement. We are pursuing it because there may be some
   agreement with the Ministry of Urban Development.”

   3.90 The Ramjas Foundation Society in its subsequent written note
submitted as under:—

   “The reply submitted by the Ministry of Defence is totally wrong.
   The entire original Estate of the Society’s buildings thereon together
   with all assets, were requisition and acquisition by notices of 3rd
   and 15th May, 1945 under the Defence of India Act for war
   purposes and it was cancelled with effect from 30th November,
   1946. A settlement was held on 26.11.1946 between Government of
   India and the Ramjas College Society. All the assets, moveable and
   immoveable created by the Government of India during the
   occupation shall be, of the full ownership of the Ramjas College
   Society and possession will be handed over the Society on or before
   30th November 1946. It is wrong that subsequently during
   1952-53 Ramjas Anand Parbat Estate was acquired under the
   Provisions of Defence of India Act. The Demarcation and Survey
   of land between Ramjas Foundation Land and Defence Land was
   done by Revenue Authorities. During 11.2.1986 to 26.2.1986 in the
   presence of Defence Personnel and Foundation Engineers. That
   Survey clearly indicated that the Ramjas Foundation in occupation
   of its own land and there is no encroachments. That Survey was
   challenged by the Defence Authority and demanded that the
   demarcation may be carried out by the Survey of India. The Survey
   of India Authority declined to do the Survey as it was a built up
   area. The Defence authority referred the matter to Revenue
   Authority and the S.D.M. gave 8 (Eight) opportunities from
   6.12.1991 to 17.2.1992 but the Defence Authority did not co-operate.
   Ultimately the Surveys done by Kanoogo was declared final. The
   reply given by Army Authority that Demarcation and Survey of
   the area was done by Civil Revenue Authority seems to be wrong
   as Ramjas Foundation was not informed of any demarcation of
   the area by Revenue Authority being an interested party. The land
   has been acquired by DDA through paper possession which is
   challenged and the matter is pending before Lt. Governor, Delhi
   and the Ministry of Urban Development.”
                              78

    3.90 The Committee observe that dispute between the Ramjas
Foundation and the Army is on the issue of genuineness of
agreement signed in 1942-43 under the provisions of Defence of
India Act. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of
Defence may examine the matter on merit and decide accordingly.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in
this regard.




  NEW DELHI;                         BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
31 July, 2006                                           Chairman,
9 Sravana, 1928 (Saka)              Standing Committee on Defence.
                                             ANNEXURE

LIST OF INDIVIDUALS/EXPERTS/ASSOCIATIONS WHO
       APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE

 1. Shri Pankaj Kumar, Advocate, New Delhi
 2. Shri Basudeb Majumdar, New Delhi
 3. Shri H.S. Yadav, New Delhi
 4. Shri Satya Prakash, New Delhi
 5. Shri Narinder Chadha, New Delhi
 6. Shri Vikas Valunjkar, Pune
 7. Shri Venkatesh Shete, Pune
 8. Shri Gajanan Y. Naik, Pune
 9. Shri B.K. Gawali, Nasik
10. Shri R.D. Dange, Nasik
11. Shri B.N. Mojad, Nasik
12. Shri Devidas Yashwant Pansambal, Ahmednagar
13. Shri B.M. Masani, Mhow
14. Shri Prabhu Dayal Patel, Sagar
15. Shri Ramesh Patel, Sagar
16. Shri Sandeep More, Pune
17. Shri Sunil Javalkar, Pune
18. Shri Bharat Vanjale, Pune
19. Shri Shyam More, Pune
20. Shri Nivrutti Vanjale, Pune
21. Shri Machhindra Vanjale, Pune
22. Shri Balasaheb Eknath Gamne, Nasik
23. Shri Popat Lohanu Lone, Nasik
24. Shri Punjaji Bhikaji Darade, Nasik
25. Shri Balwant Pandharinath Lone, Nasik

                          79
                          80

26. Shri Sudam Kisan Gamne, Nasik
27. Shri Damodar Bhaguji Gamne, Nasik
28. Shri Mangalasekar, Arakonam, Tamil Nadu
29. Shri S. Dharanipathy, Tamil Nadu
30. Shri P. Palani, Tamil Nadu
31. Shri R. Rajendran, Tamil Nadu
32. Shri D. Narayanamurthy, Vellore District, Tamil Nadu
33. Shri R. Madavan, Arakonam
34. Shri Dharnidhar Majhi, Bolangir, Orissa
35. Shri T.D. Mahananda, Bolangir, Orissa
36. Shri M.K. Sharma, Bolangir, Orissa
37. Shri O. Srinivas, Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh, Visakhapatnam
  MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I OF
     THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2004-05)

   The Committee sat on Thursday, the 14th July, 2005 at 1500 hrs. to
1610 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.

                               PRESENT

       Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
       Shri Churchill Alemao — Convenor

                                MEMBERS

                               Lok Sabha

     3. Shri Iliyas Azmi
     4. Shri Suresh Chandel
     5. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
     6. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

                               Rajya Sabha

     7. Smt. N.P. Durga
     8. Shri Janardan Dwivedi

                               SECRETARIAT

       1. Shri P.K. Bhandari        —        Director
       2. Smt. Anita Jain           —        Deputy Secretary
       3. Shri D.R. Shekhar         —        Under Secretary

            Representatives of the Ministry of Defence

     1. Shri Ajai Vikram Singh, Defence Secretary
     2. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Secretary (DP)
     3. Ms. Somi Tandon, Secretary (Def. Fin.)
     4. Shri Ranjit Issar, Additional Secretary (I)
     5. Smt. Rekha Bharvaga, AS (B)
     6. Shri S. Banerjee, Addl. Secy. (DP)
                                   81
                                   82

     7. Dr. A.S Pillai, CCR&D (ACE&NS) & DS
     8. Shri C.R. Mohapatra, DGDE
     9. Shri Anand Misra, JS (C&W)
    10. Shri T. Ramachandru, JS (OF)
    11. Shri Alok Perti, JS (S)
    12. Shri Sudhir Nath, JS (HAL)
    13. Smt. Rita Menon, JS (SY)
    14. Shri S.C. Narang, CCR&D (R)
    15. Shri P.K. Misra, Chairman, OFB
    16. Maj. Gen. Rajnesh Gossain, Chairman & MD, BDL
    17. Dr. Ram Snehi, DDG (NC), OFB
    18. Rear Adm. K. Mohanrao, DG, Project Seabird
    19. Cdr. Rakesh Khanna, GM (F&K), Project Seabird
    20. Cdr. B.D. Yadav, Commander, NHQ/DOW
    21. Shri Ashok Harnal, Addl. DG, DGDE
    22. Shri Sauvik Majumdar, DDG, DGDE
    23. Smt. Gita Kashyap Perti, DDG, DGDE
    24. Shri K.G. Gupta, DDG (Coord.)
    25. Shri Ravi Shankar, ADG, DGDE
    26. Brig. L.P. Sahi, DDG LW, QMG Branch
    27. Col. Yashwant Singh, Dir/LW (West), QMG Branch
    28. Shri R.K. Chauhan, Dir P&C, DRDO
    29. Shri K.N. Rai, Dir CW&E, DRDO
    30. Gp. Capt. V.K. Karpal, DAFW (P&C), Air Hqrs.
    31. Shri Narendra Kumar, Dir (S-III)

     2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Defence Secretary and
his colleagues to the sitting of the Committee and invited their attention
to the Directions 55 and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok
Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of the
sitting.

    3. The Defence Secretary then briefed the Committee on the subject
‘A Critical Review of Rehabilitation of Displaced Persons’. Thereafter,
the presentation was made by the representative of DGDE on the
subject.
                                  83

    4. The representative of DGDE informed the Committee on National
Policy on Rehabilitation and Resettlement, salient features, objectives
and criteria for applicability of the policy.

    5. The representative further informed the Committee about the
monitoring mechanism on implementation of the policy and criteria
for applicability. He also informed the Committee about the
rehabilitation package.

   6. The Chairman and Members raised certain queries and the same
were resolved by the representatives of DGDE and Ministry of Defence.

    7. It was then decided by the Sub-Committee that the issue
demands thorough examination and it should be examined by the
Full Committee.

                       Witnesses then withdrew.

   8. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.

                    The Committee then adjourned.
   MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING
           COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)

    The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 22nd August, 2005 at
1815 hrs. to 1940 hrs. in Committee Room No. 62, Parliament House,
New Delhi.

                               PRESENT

       Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil—Chairman

                                MEMBERS

                               Lok Sabha

    2. Shri Churchil Alemao
    3. Shri Iliyas Azmi
    4. Shri Suresh Chandel
    5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
    6. Shri Milind Deora
    7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
    8. Dr. K.S. Manoj
    9. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
   10. Shri Manvendra Singh
   11. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
   12. Shri Dharmendra Yadav

                               Rajya Sabha

   13. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
   14. Shri Anand Sharma

                               SECRETARIAT

       1. Shri P.K. Bhandari        —        Director
       2. Shri D.R. Shekhar         —        Under Secretary

                           LIST OF WITNESSES

    1. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Defence Secretary
    2. Shri Dhanendra Kumar, Secretary (DP)
                                   84
                                    85

     3. Smt. Sheela Bhide, FA (Acquisition)
     4. Shri Ranjit Issar, Addl. Secy. (I)
     5. Shri P.K. Misra, Chairman, OFB
     6. Shri Anand Misra, JS (C&W)
     7. Rear Adml. K. Mohanrao, DG, Project Seabird
     8. Shri C.R. Mohapatra, Director General Defence Estates
     9. Shri Ashok Harnal, Addl. DG, DGDE
    10. Dr. Ram Snehi, DDG (NC), OFB
    11. Air Cmde G.R. Prasad, VSM-PD (AF Works)
    12. Brig. L.P. Sahi, DDG LW, QMG Branch
    13. Col. K.S. Chauhan, Dir/Plg (Lands)
    14. Shri K.N. Rai, Director CW&E, DRDO

    2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee and informed the members that representatives of
the Ministry of Defence would tender oral evidence on the subject “A
Critical Review of Rehabilitation of Displaced Persons.”

    3. The Committee then welcomed the new Defence Secretary and
his colleagues to the sitting of the Committee and invited their attention
to the Directions 55 and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations
of the sitting.

    4. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Defence on the subject “A Critical Review of
Rehabilitation of Displaced Persons”. Members of the Committee then
sought clarification of the working and execution of certain projects
like Balasore, Ahmednagar, Rajgir etc. regarding resettlement and
rehabilitation package for projects affected families. The Committee
after elaborate deliberation on the related issues directed the Ministry
to furnish information on each project in execution regarding acquisition
of land, compensation assessed, demand of the State Government/
landowners, compensation granted/award of Collector, filed reference
with Collector, cases pending in District Courts, details of Rehabilitation
Package and welfare measures for the project affected families, reasons
for delay in paying compensation and problem being faced by the
Ministry in execution of the policies, cooperation by the State
Governments and their latest position. The Committee also desired
that a note on “Green Field Projects” might also be sought from the
Ministry. The Ministry assured to furnish written replies thereon. The
                                  86

Chairman stressed that information pertaining to no. of families
displaced, project-wise, compensation paid, rehabilitation package etc.
should be supplied at the earliest.

   4. The evidence was not concluded.

                         Witnesses then withdrew.

   5. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.

                    The Committee then adjourned.
   MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
           COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)

    The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 21st September, 2005 from
1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room No. 139, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.

                              PRESENT

       Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil—Chairman

                               MEMBERS

                              Lok Sabha

    2. Shri Suresh Chandel
    3. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
    4. Dr. C. Krishnan
    5. Shri S.D. Mandlik
    6. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
    7. Shri Dharmendra Yadav

                              Rajya Sabha

    8. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
    9. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
   10. Shri Pramod Mahajan

                              SECRETARIAT

       1. Shri P.K. Grover         —        Joint Secretary
       2. Smt. Anita Jain          —        Deputy Secretary
       3. Shri D.R. Shekhar        —        Under Secretary

             Representatives of Ministry of Defence

    1. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Defence Secretary
    2. Shri Ranjit Issar, Addl. Secy (I)
    3. Smt. Rekha Bhargava, AS (B)
    4. Smt. Sheela Bhide, FA (Acquisition)

                                  87
                                   88

     5. Shri Anup Mukherji, AS (DP)
     6. Shri C.R. Mohapatra, DGDE
     7. Shri Anand Misra, JS (C&W)
     8. Shri T. Ramachandru, JS(OF)
     9. Shri P.K. Misra, Chairman, OFB
    10. Shri K.N. Rai, Chief Executive, CW&E, DRDO
    11. Dr. Ram Snehi, DDG(NC), OFB
    12. Cmde. P.C. Agarwal, DG(AOD)
    13. Cdr. Rakesh Khanna, GM(F&K), Project Seabird
    14. Shri Ashok Harnal, Addl. DG, DGDE
    15. Brig. L.P. Sahi, DDG LW, QMG Branch
    16. Col. K.S. Chauhan, Dir./Plg (Lands), QMG Br.

    2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee and informed the members that representatives of
the Ministry of Defence would tender oral evidence on the subject “A
Critical Review of Rehabilitation of Displaced Persons”.

    3. The Chairman then welcomed the Defence Secretary and his
colleagues to the sitting of the Committee and drew their attention to
the Directions 55 and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha
regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting.

     4. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Defence on the subject “A Critical Review of
Rehabilitation of Displaced Persons”. Members of the Committee sought
clarifications on problems of displaced persons and various sensitive
issues relating to their rehabilitation.

    5. The representative of the Ministry informed that a National
Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation for project-affected families
was formulated in February 2004 and the notification to that effect
was issued by the Ministry of Rural Development. This policy was
adopted and circulated to all defence formulations in January 2005.
However, the representatives of the Ministry further informed that the
proposals which were sanctioned for acquisition did not attract the
provisions of the national policy because the policy states that the
guidelines would be applicable where the acquisition involves
500 families in plain areas or 250 families on hilly terrains.
                                  89

     6. The Committee also expressed their concern over the undue
delay in paying compensation as well as rehabilitating the project-
affected families. The Committee raised the matter that compensation
for the rehabilitation of the affected persons should be given according
to the present market cost of land and building houses and for that
purpose, measurement should be done jointly by Central and State
Governments in order to avoid discrepancy while making the payment.
The Committee also expressed their concern about the people who are
living in Border areas are displaced from time to time.

    7. The Committee also desired the Ministry of Defence to furnish
information pertaining to number of families displaced, compensation
paid, rehabilitation package etc. on each project and status of new
projects before the Ministry for approval.

   8. The Evidence was not concluded.

                         Witnesses then withdrew.

   9. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.

                     The Committee then adjourned.
    MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
           COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)

    The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 19th October, 2005 from
1500 hrs. to 1645 hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.

                             PRESENT

      Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil—Chairman

                               MEMBERS

                             Lok Sabha

    2. Shri Illiyas Azmi
    3. Shri Suresh Chandel
    4. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
    5. Dr. C. Krishnan
    6. Dr. K.S. Manoj
    7. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
    8. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
    9. Shri Manvendra Singh
   10. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

                             Rajya Sabha

   11. Shri R.K. Anand
   12. Smt. N.P. Durga
   13. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
   14. Shri Anand Sharma
   15. Shri Lalit Suri

                             SECRETARIAT

      1. Shri S.K. Sharma        —         Additional Secretary
      2. Shri R.C. Ahuja         —         Joint Secretary
      3. Smt. Anita Jain         —         Deputy Secretary
      4. Shri D.R. Shekhar       —         Under Secretary

                                 90
                                   91

               Representatives of Ministry of Defence

     1. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Defence Secretary
     2. Smt. Rekha Bhargava, AS(B)
     3. Shri P.K. Misra, Chairman, OFB
     4. Shri Anand Misra, JS(C&W)
     5. Shri C.R. Mohapatra, DGDE
     6. Shri Ashok Harnal, Addl. DG, DGDE
     7. Shri T. Ramachandru, JS (OF)
     8. Shri K.N. Rai, Chief Executive, CW&E, DRDO
     9. Shri Navendra Nath, Asstt. DGDE
    10. Brig. L.P. Sahi, DDG LW, QMG Branch
    11. Shri R. Gumber, DDG(NC)/OFB
    12. Col. K.S. Chauhan, Dir/Plg (Lands), QMG Br.
    13. Shri Sharad Ghodke, OSD (P)

    2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee and informed
the members that the Committee would take oral evidence of the
Ministry on the subject ‘A Critical Review of Rehabilitation of Displaced
Persons.”

    3. Before starting discussion on the subject, the Committee placed
on record their appreciation for the Armed Forces and the Ministry of
Defence for commendable work done in the earthquake affected areas
in J&K.

     4. The Committee then sought clarifications from the Ministry on
various issues like rehabilitation policy of Ministry of Defence vis-a-vis
other Government Departments, court cases in regard to land
acquisition, employment for displaced persons, monitoring mechanism
etc. The Committee also raised various points based on their study
visit to Defence establishments and rehabilitation sites at Hyderabad,
Bangalore, Chennai and Karwar etc.

    5. Several issues/queries were raised by Members, which were
responded to by the Ministry officials. The Committee desired some
more information on the following issues:

      — Rehabilitation package extended by the Ministry of Defence
        and State Govt. in the rehabilitation cases of Mahajan Field
                                92

          Firing Ranges and about acquisition of land in Himachal
          Pradesh for Averi Project in Kangra district.
      — Efforts made by the Ministry of Defence to solve the pending
        court cases with regard to compensation paid to the affected
        people for acquiring their lands. Also details of the cases
        where appeals were filed by the Government against the
        affected family or court orders.
      — Procedure followed for processing of cases/processing/
        disbursement of funds by the Government for various
        purposes like, house, electricity, cattle shade, employment,
        etc.
      — Policy of Government for expansion of already existing
        defence establishments and acquiring more land for them.

   6. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence assured the
Committee to furnish information on above issues at an early date.

                        Witnesses then withdrew.

   7. The verbatim record was kept.

                   The Committee then adjourned.
      MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE
       STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)

    The Committee sat on Thursday, the 12th January, 2006 from
1100 hrs. to 1500 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.

                             PRESENT

      Shri R.K. Anand —in the Chair

                               MEMBERS

                             Lok Sabha

    2. Shri A.V. Bellarmin
    3. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
    4. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
    5. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
    6. Shri Dharmendra Yadav

                             Rajya Sabha

    7. Smt. N.P. Durga
    8. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
    9. Shri Lalit Suri

                             SECRETARIAT

      1. Shri S.K. Sharma           —      Additional Secretary
      2. Shri R.C. Ahuja            —      Joint Secretary
      3. Smt. Anita Jain            —      Deputy Secretary
      4. Shri D.R. Shekhar          —      Under Secretary

                   LIST OF NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES

    1. Shri Pankaj Kumar, Advocate, New Delhi
    2. Shri Basudeb Majumdar, New Delhi
    3. Shri H.S. Yadav, New Delhi
    4. Shri Vikas Valunjkar, Pune

                                 93
                                  94

     5. Shri Venkatesh Shete, Pune
     6. Shri Gajanan Y. Naik, Pune
     7. Shri Balasaheb Gawali, Nasik
     8. Shri R.D. Dange, Nasik
     9. Shri Baburao Mojad, Nasik

     2. In the absence of Hon’ble Chairman, Standing Committee on
Defence, the Committee chose Shri R.K. Anand, M.P. to act as Chairman
for the sitting under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha.

    3. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Shri Pankaj
Kumar, Advocate and invited his attention to Direction 58 by the
Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of
the deliberations of the sitting and requested him to give his views/
suggestions on the subject ‘A Critical Review of Rehabilitation of
Displaced Persons’. The witness suggested the following points for
consideration of the Committee:

      (i) To make an inventory of the magnitude of displacement
          and to conduct random survey of the affected area to
          examine how they can be provided alternative
          accommodation and the means of livelihood.
      (ii) In The Land Acquisition Act, 4th and 7th amendments have
           taken place but still peoples’ views are not taken into
           account. When land is acquired for defence purposes, the
           views of the affected persons must be taken into account.
     (iii) Tribal people whose land is acquired by the Government
           are not reasonably rehabilitated.

                        Witness then withdrew.

     4. The Chairman then invited Shri Basudeb Majumdar, New Delhi
to put forth his views/suggestions on the subject. He suggested the
following points for consideration of the Committee:

      (i) Medical facilities and facilities for free education in army
          school for their children should be given to the displaced
          persons.
      (ii) Compensation should be paid at the market rate.
     (iii) Evacuees should be given annualised value of the
           compensation pension so that they may live a decent life.
                                    95

     (iv) While giving compensation, inflationary trend, factors of life
          expectancy and prevailing rate of interest should also be
          considered.

                         Witness then withdrew.

    5. The Chairman then invited the representatives of the Anand
Parbat Residents Welfare Association to put forth their problems/views/
suggestions on the subject. They suggested the following points for
consideration of the Committee:

      (i) Unnecessary harassment from the Military side should not
          take place.
      (ii) The issue of civil/military land in the area should be settled
           so that 30 families residing in the area are not troubled.

                        Witnesses then withdrew.

    6. The Chairman then invited Shri Vikas Valunjkar, Shri Gajanan
Y. Naik and Shri Venkatesh Shete from Pune to give their views/share
problems on the subject. They suggested:

      (i) Land which falls outside the safety zone of the proposed
          firing zone in their area should be released and the matter
          whether the land falls under the firing range or not should
          be examined thoroughly.
      (ii) On papers the possession of the land is with the Defence
           authority but in practice the possession is with them. The
           local authorities are not providing electricity, roads and other
           facilities because the land pertains to defence authority. A
           Committee or a Commission may be appointed to examine
           all these matters so that they may coordinate with the State
           Government and the Central Government.

                        Witnesses then withdrew.

   7. The Chairman then invited Shri Balasaheb Gawali, Shri R.D.
Dange and Shri Basurao Mojad from Nasik to submit their suggestions/
problems. They submitted the following problems:

      (i) All the land of village Ambad Taluka, District Nasik was
          acquired by the Government in 1943 and then in 1952. At
          present, there is no evidence with the residents whether
          they have lived in this village or not. Today, the village
          Ambad Taluka in District Nasik does not exist because it
          has been completely eliminated from the map of the district.
                              96

  (ii) No facility has been given by the State or Central
       Government to obtain even the caste certificate.
 (iii) The villagers were backward and illiterate. So they failed to
       resist and put their demands in proper form. The villagers
       were forcibly asked to vacate their houses and leave the
       village without making alternative arrangement of their
       livelihood and residence.
 (iv) To conduct an official survey of such people and provide
      them land.

                   Witnesses then withdrew.

8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

                The Committee then adjourned.
 MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
           COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)

    The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 24th January, 2006 from
1100 hrs. to 1400 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.

                             PRESENT

      Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil—Chairman

                               MEMBERS

                             Lok Sabha

    2. Shri Iliyas Azmi
    3. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
    4. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
    5. Dr. K.S. Manoj
    6. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
    7. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar

                             Rajya Sabha

    8. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
    9. Smt. N.P. Durga
   10. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
   11. Shri Lalit Suri

                             SECRETARIAT

      1. Shri S.K. Sharma        —         Additional Secretary
      2. Shri R.C. Ahuja         —         Joint Secretary
      3. Smt. Anita Jain         —         Deputy Secretary
      4. Shri D.R. Shekhar       —         Under Secretary

                  List of Non-Official Witnesses

    1. Shri Devidas Yashwant Pansambal, Ahmednagar
    2. Shri B.M. Masani, Mhow

                                 97
                                    98

     3. Shri Prabhu Dayal Patel, Sagar
     4. Shri Ramesh Patel, Sagar
     5. Shri Sandeep More, Pune
     6. Shri Bharat Vanjale, Pune
     7. Shri Shyam More, Pune
     8. Shri Nivrutti, Pune
     9. Shri Machhindra, Pune
    10. Shri Balasaheb Eknath Gamne, Nasik
    11. Shri Punjali Bhikaji Darade, Nasik
    12. Shri Basant Govind Gamne, Nasik
    13. Shri Damodar Bhaguji Gamne, Nasik

     2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the non-official
witness Shri Devidas Yashwant Pansambal from Ahmednagar to the
sitting of the Committee and invited his attention to Directions 55 and
58 of the Directions by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding
maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting. The
Chairman then asked him to present his views/problems/suggestions
on the subject ‘A Critical Review of Rehabilitation of Displaced Persons’.
The witness then expressed the following suggestions/problems being
faced by the K.K. Ranges project affected persons of Nagar, Parner,
Sanganer, Rahuri villages of Ahmednagar district on account of
acquisition of their land of Defence purposes:

       (i) Compensation paid which was less than the prevailing
           market rate needs to be reconsidered;
      (ii) For securing Government Jobs age limit should be extended
           up to 40 years;
     (iii) Education facilities and concession in fees to the children of
           the Project-affected families be provided;
     (iv) Reservation of seats for employment in Government, Semi-
          Government and Private Sector;
      (v) Government land should be provided for business and trade.

                         Witness then withdrew.

   3. The Chairman then invited Shri B.M. Masani, Advocate, Mhow
Cantonment, Madhya Pradesh to present his views on the above
                                   99

subject. The witness proposed the following points for consideration
of the Committee:

      (i) Under the Land Acquisition Act, there is no provision for
          any rehabilitation apart from the monetary compensation.
          Rehabilitation of the affected people must be done as most
          of the oustees do not know how to use the compensation
          amount they try to lead ostentatious life and spend money
          on wedding, etc.;
      (ii) Compensation in Mhow Bangalow’s has ranged from
           Rs. 100 to Rs. 1,65,000 which is very low;
     (iii) Occupants of the outhouses of bungalows should be paid
           compensation;
     (iv) The Army has not used the property for the purpose it was
          acquired. Besides many of the properties have been
          converted into parks, football fields, etc., which is totally
          undemocratic.

                         Witness then withdrew.

     4. The Chairman then invited Shri Prabhu Dayal Patel and
Shri Ramesh Patel of Chhawani Krishak Sangh, Sagar, Madhya Pradesh
to put forth their views on the subject. The witnesses suggested the
following points:

      (i) Land should be acquired according to land use classification.
          For construction purposes, agricultural land should not be
          acquired or made use of.
      (ii) No compensation was paid to the farmers of Sagar District
           for the land acquired in 1962 which needs to be paid.

    The Committee during the discussion observed that witnesses were
not able to produce papers/records/documents to substantiate their
claims of ownership, compensation, lease ownership etc. The
Committee, therefore, decided to call District Collectors of the relevant
Districts and to seek opinion of the Ministry of Law in such issues.

                        Witnesses then withdrew.

    5. The Chairman then invited Shri Sandeep More, Shri Sunil
Javalkar, Shri Bharat Vanjale and Shri Nivrutti Vanjale from Pune and
asked them to present their views on the subject. The witnesses then
mentioned the following points:

      (i) Basic facilities like electricity, water, etc. not given to the
          affected persons as per the rehabilitation laws.
                                 100

     (ii) Residents are not allowed to construct houses at the
          rehabilitated place according to Pune Municipal Corporation
          Plan.
    (iii) Monetary support is needed from the Government to
          construct the houses.
     (iv) The land acquired by NDA at New Kolte is still vacant and
          it should be returned to the villagers so that they can open
          a school thereon.

                      Witnesses then withdrew.

     6. The Chairman then invited Shri Balasaheb Eknath Gamne,
Shri Punjaji Bhikaji Darade, Shri Basant Govind Gamne and
Shri Balwant Pandrinath Gamne from Nasik to present their views/
suggestions/problems on the above subject. They suggested the
following points:

      (i) In 1943, 1200 acre land was acquired by the Military but it
          was not used for the purpose for which it was acquired. So
          it should be returned to the villagers.
     (ii) Their village which was eliminated from the map should
          be rehabilitated again by providing alternate land and
          rehabilitation of the displaced persons in order to restore
          their identity. The Committee observed that witnesses did
          not have sufficient documents to substantiate their claim.
          The Committee, therefore, asked them to submit their
          supporting documents/papers to the Committee within 15-
          20 days for consideration.

                      Witnesses then withdrew.

   7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

                    The Committee then adjourned.
    MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FOURTH SITTING OF THE
      STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)

    The Committee sat on Thursday, the 16 February, 2006 from
1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.

                             PRESENT

      Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil—Chairman

                              MEMBERS

                             Lok Sabha

    2. Shri Iliyas Azmi
    3. Shri A.V. Bellarmin
    4. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
    5. Dr. K.S. Manoj
    6. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
    7. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
    8. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

                             Rajya Sabha

    9. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
   10. Smt. N.P. Durga

                             SECRETARIAT

      1. Shri R.C. Ahuja         —         Joint Secretary
      2. Smt. Anita Jain         —         Deputy Secretary
      3. Shri D.R. Shekhar       —         Under Secretary

                  List of Non-Official Witnesses

    1. Shri Mangalasekar, Arakonam, Tamil Nadu
    2. Shri S. Dharanipathy, Tamil Nadu
    3. Shri P. Palani, Tamil Nadu
    4. Shri R. Rajendran, Tamil Nadu

                                101
                                   102

      5. Shri D. Narayanmurthy, Vellore District, Tamil Nadu
      6. Shri R. Madavan, Arakonam
      7. Shri Dharnidhar Majhi, Bolangir, Orissa
      8. Shri T.D. Mahananda, Bolangir, Orissa
      9. Shri M.K. Sharma, Bolangir, Orissa
     10. Shri O. Srinivas, Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh, Vishakhapatnam

     2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.

    3.    **                             **                           **

    4. Then the Chairman welcomed the non-official witnesses of Land
Sufferers Welfare Association, Arakonam, Shri R. Madavan and
Shri D. Narayanmurthy, Vellore District of Tamil Nadu to the sitting
of the Committee and invited their attention to Directions 55 and
58 of the Directions by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding
maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting. The
Chairman then asked them to present their views/problems/
suggestions on the subject ‘A Critical Review of Rehabilitation of
Displaced Persons’. The witnesses then made the following
submissions/expressed the following problems being faced by them
on account of acquisition of their land for defence purposes, for
consideration of the Committee:

         (i) To set up naval airbase at Arakonam, seven villages having
             cultivable land were acquired by the Defence authority in
             1987. At the time of acquisition, promise was made by the
             Tehsildar to provide job to one of the family members with
             an exemption up to the age of 40, but till now no
             employment has been provided.

         (ii) Compensation paid was less than the prevailing market rate
              and it needs to be reconsidered.

      (iii) Even after the Sub Court’s favourable decision for raising
            the compensation by 40%, that too has been delayed for
            the past 10 to 15 years.

      (iv) The High Court of Madras also desired payment of increased
           compensation. But the naval authorities filed cases before
           High Court and Supreme Court. Therefore, the witnesses

**Related to other matters.
                                  103

          desired the Committee to take up this matter with Naval
          authorities to withdraw their appeal and pay the much
          delayed compensation.
      (v) They also informed the Committee that Naval authority did
          not come for negotiation with the landowners.
     (vi) Even after High Court of Madras order, 350 affected families
          are waiting for job and justice.
                       Witnesses then withdrew.
    5. The Hon’ble Chairman, then welcomed Shri Dharnidhar Majhi,
Shri T.D. Mahananda and Shri M.K. Sharma and invited their attention
to Directions 55 and 58 of the Directions by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok
Sabha. They put forth the following problems:
      (i) On 29 October, 1984 Smt. Indira Gandhi laid the foundation
          stone of Ordnance Factory at Badmal, District Bolangir,
          Orissa and the land was acquired on 2 June 1986. The
          compensation paid was very less and the promise for
          providing employment for each displaced families has not
          been fulfilled. The outsees have not gone to Court for justice.
      (ii) Out of 1030 displaced families only 987 people got
           employment, and till now, 30 persons have lost their jobs.
     (iii) The living standard of the displaced persons has gone down.
           The basic facilities like road, drinking water, health centre,
           etc. have not been provided. Only 20 decimal land have
           been provided to the affected families whereas they require
           a minimum of 50 decimal land.
                       Witnesses then withdrew.
    6. The Hon’ble Chairman then welcomed Shri O. Srinivas, Bharatiya
Majdoor Sangh, Vishakhapatnam and requested him to put forth his
problems and give suggestions on the subject and invited his attention
to the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. He made the following
points for consideration of the Committee:
      (i) Payment of compensation should be made at the prevailing
          market price.
      (ii) Provide each beneficiary similar cultivable land which has
           been taken away at a different place.
     (iii) The displaced persons like fishermen should be rehabilitated
           in such a manner that they are able to continue traditional
           vocation.
                            104

 (iv) Employment to one member of the affected family.

  (v) Allotment of house site to each beneficiary.

                   Witness then withdrew.

7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

                The Committee then adjourned.
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
           COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)

    The Committee sat on Thursday, the 23rd February, 2006 from
1500 hrs. to 1815 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.

                               PRESENT
       Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil—Chairman
                                MEMBERS
                               Lok Sabha

    2. Shri Iliyas Azmi
    3. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
    4. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
    5. Dr. K.S. Manoj
    6. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh

                              Rajya Sabha

    7. Smt. N.P. Durga

                               SECRETARIAT

       1. Shri R.C. Ahuja          —         Joint Secretary
       2. Smt. Anita Jain          —         Deputy Secretary
       3. Shri D.R. Shekhar        —         Under Secretary

                            LIST OF WITNESSES

Ministry of Rural Development

    1. Dr. Renuka Viswanathan, Secretary
    2. Shri L. Rynjah, Additional Secretary
    3. Shri Rakesh Behari, Joint Secretary
    4. Shri P.K. Sarangi, Director (Land Reforms)

Ministry of Law & Justice

    5. Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary
                                  105
                                  106

Government of Karnataka

     6. Shri S.M. Jaamdar, Principal Secretary, Revenue Department,
        Karnataka
     7. Shri Ritesh Kumar Singh, Deputy Commissioner, Karnataka

Government of Tamil Nadu

     8. Thiru P. Shivasankaran, Additional Commissioner (Land), Tamil
        Nadu
     9. Thiru Veerashanmugamoni, District Collector, Thanjavur, Tamil
        Nadu
    10. Thiru S. Gopalakrishnan, District Collector, Vellore, Tamil Nadu

Government of Orissa

    11. Shri T.K. Mishra, Principal Secretary, Govt. of Orissa, Revenue
        Department
    12. Shri Narayan Chandra Jena, District Collector, Bolangir, Orissa

    2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the
Committee and informed that representatives of Ministry of Rural
Development, Ministry of Law & Justice, Principal Secretaries of
Karnataka and Orissa and District Collectors of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu
and Orissa would tender oral evidence on the subject ‘A Critical Review
of Rehabilitation of Displaced Persons’.

    3. The Chairman then welcomed the Secretary, Rural Development
and her colleagues to the sitting of the Committee and drew their
attention to Directions 55 and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok
Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of the
Committee.

    4. The representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
informed that the National Policy on Rehabilitation & Resettlement of
Displaced Persons, 2003 (NPRR-2003) was formulated after a lot of
deliberations. It lays down the policy and framework which is very
specific on a number of issues. But, it still continues to be in the form
of guidelines. The secretary (RD) also informed the Committee that
amendments to the Land Acquisition Act were being actively considered
and consultation process was going on with State Governments. She
further clarified that State Governments or the acquiring agencies were
free to offer higher monetary package than the minimum benefits
mentioned in the Rehabilitation & Resettlement Policy, 2003.
                                   107

    5. The Chairman and Members raised various queries e.g.
applicability of NPRR to the cases prior to 2004 and to projects affecting
less than 500 families in plains and 250 in hilly areas, etc. Queries
raised were responded to by the representatives of the Ministry.

                        Witnesses then withdrew.

    6. The Chairman then welcomed the representative of the Ministry
of Law and Justice and invited his attention to Directions 55 and 58
of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining
confidentiality of the deliberations of the Committee.

    7. On the issue of providing better package than what was there
in the guidelines, the representative informed the Committee that the
law did not prohibit better package but policy should not be
discriminatory and opposed to law of land. On the question of legality
of NPRR policy, the representative of the Ministry stated that the policy
which had been framed, would not be law unless it is passed by the
Parliament in the form of an Act or an amendment is made to the
Land Acquisition Act. However, the policy had a legal basis in the
absence of legislative enactment by Parliament.

    8. The Members raised some queries which were responded to by
the representative of the Ministry.

                         Witness then withdrew.

    9. The Chairman then welcomed the Principal Secretary,
Government of Karnataka and his colleague to the sitting of the
Committee and invited their attention to Directions 55 and 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining
confidentiality of the deliberations of the Committee. The Principal
Secretary shared his past experience of the biggest rehabilitation project
of Upper Krishna, where the oustees were paid the negotiated price
and not compensation. There was no-middleman and no court
reference. The consent price was decided by the Advisory Committee
at the District Level, consisting of the local MLA, M.P., representatives
of the affected people, the local civil judge or the district judge, the
agricultural office, the collector, the divisional commissioner.

    10. When asked as to whether the Central Government had
consulted State Government, before bringing the National Resettlement
& Rehabilitation Policy, the Principal Secretary stated that the initial
draft was supposed to have the land acquisition policy, plus
rehabilitation policy. However, that was not accepted by the GoM. It
                                  108

was broken down and separated into R&R and Land Acquisition Policy.
The Land Acquisition Policy was also proposed to be amended. He
further stated that R&R Policy was not a law but advisory in nature.
It did not prohibit a State to follow a better policy. He mentioned
some shortcomings/inadequacy of the Policy and added that it required
several amendments.

   11. Answering a query of the Committee on land-for-land
compensation, he stated that it would not be a correct method. It
must be one of the alternatives, but not the only alternative.

    12. Clarifying query of the Committee, the Secretary, further made
a distinction between rehabilitation and resettlement and told how
they were facing difficulties in rehabilitating the oustees. To overcome
the problems, he suggested that, rehabilitation should be area specific
and community specific.

    13. The representatives then made a power point presentation on
the progress of rehabilitation work on Project Sea Bird and clarified
certain queries of hon’ble members in this regard.

                        Witnesses then withdrew.

    14. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of the State
Government of Tamil Nadu to the sitting of the Committee and invited
their attention to Directions 55 and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations
of the Committee.

    15. The Collector, Vellore, pointed out that out of 940 cases of land
acquisition, in 849 cases original petitions were filed and sub Court
had rewarded enhanced compensation in 603 cases. Navy authority
instead of paying them enhanced compensation, had preferred appeal
against the judgement.

    16. The Commitment suggested that Naval authorities, district
collectors and farmers should sit together to work out better packages
to the affected families.

   17. The Chairman and Members of the Committee raised certain
queries which were answered by the representatives of Tamil Nadu
Government.

                        Witnesses then withdrew.
                                  109

    18. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of
Government of Orissa to the sitting of the Committee and invited
their attention to Directions 55 and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations
of the Committee.

     19. The representatives of Orissa Government briefed the Committee
about the Resettlement & Rehabilitation policy packages for NALCO,
the Coal unit, Rourkela Steel Plant, Kalinga Nagar, Rengali Dam project,
etc. which were much better than the National policy for Resettlement
and Rehabilitation.

    20. They also informed the Committee that a Group of Ministers
appointed by the Hon’ble Chief Minister had drafted a new R&R
policy, 2006 for the state of Orissa. The new R&R Policy, 2006 had
many special features which were not in the national policy. The NPRR-
2003, was not applicable if the number of displaced families was less
than 500 in the case of non-tribals and less than 250 in the case of
tribals whereas State Government’s new policy was applicable even if
there were ten people who were displaced.

    21. The Committee wanted to know the efforts being made by the
State or District authorities and the defence authorities to sit together
and develop some packages for rehabilitation, HRD, ITI training etc.
for the affected families. The representatives stated that there was a
monitoring and Coordination Committee headed by the Collector, but
the General Manager of the defence project had never attended its
meetings because there was a lack of coordination between the project
authorities and others.

    22. The Committee raised certain queries which were answered by
the representatives of the Orissa Government.

                      The witnesses then withdrew.

    23. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

                     The Committee then adjourned.
     MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SEVENTH SITTING OF THE
        STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)

    The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 1st March, 2006 from
1500 hrs. to 1745 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.

                                PRESENT

        Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil—Chairman

                                 MEMBERS

                                Lok Sabha

     2. Shri A.V. Bellarmin
     3. Dr. Ramesh Jigajinagi
     4. Dr. C. Krishnan
     5. Shri S.D. Mandlik
     6. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh

                               Rajya Sabha

     7. Smt. N.P. Durga

                                SECRETARIAT

        1. Smt. Anita Jain          —         Deputy Secretary
        2. Shri D.R. Shekhar        —         Under Secretary

                             LIST OF WITNESSES

     1. Shri K.S. Vatsa, Revenue Secretary, (Relief and Rehabilitation),
        Maharashtra
     2. Shri Prabhakar Deshmukh, District Collector, Pune
     3. Shri Mahesh Zagade, District Collector, Nasik

    2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
Government of Maharashtra to the sitting of the Committee and invited
their attention to Directions 55 and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations
of the Committee. The Chairman then invited the witnesses to present

                                   110
                                  111

their view points on the status of land acquired, compensation paid,
rehabilitation work being carried out in Nasik, Pune and other parts
of Maharashtra.

    3. The representatives of Government of Maharashtra put forth
the following points for consideration of the Committee:

      (i) In Nasik most of the lands were acquired between 1941
          and 1943. Similarly, in Pune a large track of land was
          acquired for the purpose of establishing the National Defence
          Academy. Subsequently the firing range was set up in a
          large area of land.
     (ii) After revision of the State Rehabilitation Policy a number
          of times, the Rehabilitation Act came into force in 1986 and
          1999. Under the New Rehabilitation Act, all lands acquired
          beyond a certain area, like 50 hectares, would attract the
          requirements of rehabilitation, so all the new acquisitions
          would be brought under the purview of the Act.
     (iii) New Rehabilitation Act, 1999 of the State did not provide
           specific provisions for the rehabilitation of the affected
           families and guidelines were also not very clear.
     (iv) In Nasik and Pune some outstanding issues were resolved
          in consultation with the Army authorities i.e. compensation
          for acquiring their land and providing them benefits in terms
          of civic amenities, jobs plots in new villages and skill
          development training to the affected families.
     (v) Need to set up Fast Track Courts where land acquisition
         cases could be brought up and monitor these cases more
         effectively.
     (vi) Except land cost, no rehabilitation package was given by
          the Government to the affected families whose land was
          acquired by the Defence authorities in 1950s or 1960s. Now,
          the issue of rehabilitation had come up for consideration of
          the Government.
    (vii) For providing all the basic facilities to the affected families,
          the State Government had decided to set up a State
          Rehabilitation Authority.
    (viii) The State Government also decided to set up three Grievance
           Redressal Mechanisms at Aurangabad, Pune and Nagpur
           for affected families.
                               112

    (ix) For land acquired for industrial purpose, certain provision
         had been made for negotiation of price under the
         Maharashtra Industrial Act. In this Act, the Collector had
         been empowered to negotiate with the farmers and fix
         enhance compensation with the consent of farmers.

    4. The Chairman and Members raised some queries which were
responded to by the representatives.

                     Witnesses then withdrew.

   5. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.

                  The Committee then adjourned.
 MINUTES OF THE FORTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
           COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)

   The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 30th May, 2006 from 1100 hrs.
to 1245 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.

                              PRESENT

       Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil—Chairman

                                MEMBERS

                               Lok Sabha

    2. Shri Churchill Alemao
    3. Shri Iliyas Azmi
    4. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
    5. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
    6. Dr. K.S. Manoj
    7. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
    8. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
    9. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
   10. Shri Manvendra Singh
   11. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

                              Rajya Sabha

   12. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal

                              SECRETARIAT

       1. Shri R.C. Ahuja         —         Joint Secretary
       2. Smt. Anita Jain         —         Deputy Secretary
       3. Shri D.R. Shekhar       —         Under Secretary

      List of Representatives from the Ministry of Defence

    1. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Defence Secretary
    2. Shri V.K. Misra, FA (DS)

                                  113
                                    114

     3. Shri A.K. Jain, Addl. Secretary (J)
     4. Dr. (Mrs.) Rekha Bhargava, Addl. Secy. (B)
     5. Shri P.K. Rastogi, Addl. Secy. (DP)
     6. Shri C.R. Mohapatra, DGDE
     7. Shri P.K. Misra, Chairman, OFB
     8. Shri Anand Misra, JS (C&W)
     9. Shri T. Ramachandru, JS (OF)
    10. R. Adml. S. Bhasin, DG (Project Seabird)
    11. Shri K.N. Rai, Chief Executive, CW&E, DRDO
    12. Cdr. Rakesh Khanna, GM (F&K)
    13. Shri Ashok Harnal, Addl. DG, DGDE
    14. Shri Navendra Nath, DDG, DGDE
    15. Brig. Rajeev Datt, DDGPPE, QMC Branch
    16. Wg. Cdr. R. Singhal, JDW (Adm.), Air Hqrs.
    17. Col. K.S. Chauhan, Dir./Plg. (Lands), QMG Br.

Ministry of Law & Justice

        Dr. S.S. Chahar, Joint Secretary

    2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee to render
oral evidence on the subject ‘A Critical Review of Rehabilitation of
Displaced Persons’ and drew their attention to the Direction 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining
confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting.

     3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Defence on the above subject. Members of the
Committee sought clarifications on certain important issues viz.
possibilities of providing better rehabilitation package to the displaced
and affected families by the Ministry of Defence; performance and
latest position of Project Seabird; possibility to resolve the land disputes
through reconciliation etc., rehabilitation in cases where the number of
PAF is less than 500 in plain areas and 250 in hilly areas. The
Committee also sought clarification from the Ministry of Defence on
complaints regarding non use of the land for the purpose it was
acquired and need for review of land acquired by the Ministry of
Defence. The Committee also discussed how to redress the grievances
of those people who have not adequately been compensated in the
past.
                                115

   4. The representatives then clarified the queries one by one.

   5. The Committee also desired that on certain issues when the
Ministry had not furnished the written replies including the details
sought on number of cases regarding rehabilitation/compensation
pending in the various courts, information might be sent to the
Committee expeditiously.

                        Witnesses then withdrew.

   6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

                   The Committee then adjourned.
        MINUTES OF THE FIFTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE
        STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)

    The Committee sat on Monday, the 31st July, 2006 from 0930 hrs.
to 1030 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘139’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.

                              PRESENT

       Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman

                               MEMBERS

                               Lok Sabha

    2. Shri Churchill Alemao
    3. Shri A.V. Bellarmin
    4. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
    5. Dr. C. Krishnan
    6. Dr. K.S. Manoj
    7. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
    8. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
    9. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod

                              Rajya Sabha

   10. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
    11. Smt. N.P. Durga
   12. Shri K.B. Shanappa
   13. Shri Lalit Suri

                              SECRETARIAT

       1. Shri R.C. Ahuja         —         Joint Secretary
       2. Smt. Anita Jain         —         Deputy Secretary
       3. Shri D.R. Shekhar       —         Under Secretary

                                 116
                                117
     2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the
Sitting of the Committee. The Committee, thereafter, considered the
draft report on the subject ‘A Critical Review of Rehabilitation of
Displaced Persons’ and adopted the same with some additions/
modifications as suggested by the Members.

    3. The Committee then authorised the Hon’ble Chairman to finalise
the report and present the same to the Parliament.

                    The Committee then adjourned.
