                      STANDING COMMITTEE

24                        ON DEFENCE
                            (2007-08)
                          FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA




              MINISTRY OF DEFENCE



[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
      the 13th Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
        A Critical Review of Rehabilitation of Displaced Persons]




         TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT




                 LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
                       NEW DELHI

                 March, 2008/Phalguna, 1929 (Saka)
            TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT

  STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
             (2007-08)

                 (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)


                 MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
      the 13th Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
        A Critical Review of Rehabilitation of Displaced Persons]




                 Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.3.2008
                 Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19.3.2008




                   LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
                         NEW DELHI

                 March, 2008/Phalguna 1929 (Saka)
C.O.D. No. 90




Price : Rs. 100.00




© 2008 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.
                                                 CONTENTS

                                                                                                                  PAGES

COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2007-08)............................................                                 (ii)

PREFACE........................................................................................................     (iv)

CHAPTER I                 Report.............................................................................        1

CHAPTER II                Recommendations/Observations which have
                          been accepted by the Government.........................                                  42

CHAPTER III               Recommendations/Observations                 which the
                          Committee do not desire to pursue in view
                          of the Government’s replies.....................................                          54

CHAPTER IV                Recommendations/Observations in respect of
                          which replies of Government have not been
                          accepted by the Committee......................................                           57

CHAPTER V                 Recommendations/Observations in respect of
                          which final replies of Government are still
                          awaited...........................................................................        76

                          ANNEXURE ........................................................................         79

APPENDIX I                MINUTES OF THE S ITTING................................................                   82

APPENDIX II               Analysis of Action Taken by Government on
                          the Recommendations         contained in the
                          13th Report of the Standing Committee on
                          Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha).............................                               95




                                                           (i)
   COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
             ON DEFENCE (2007-08)

     Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —        Chairman

                            MEMBERS
                           Lok Sabha

 2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
 3. Shri S. Bangarappa
 4. Shri Milind Murli Deora
 5. Shri Santosh Gangwar
 6. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
 7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
 8. Shri C. Kuppusami
 9. Dr. K.S. Manoj
10. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
12. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas Patil
14. Shri Raju Rana
15. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
18. Shri Manavendra Singh
19. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
20. Shri Rajesh Verma
21. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi

                           Rajya Sabha

22. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
23. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
24. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
25. Smt. Shobhana Bharatia

                             (ii)
                               (iii)

26. Shri R.K. Dhawan
27. Smt. N.P. Durga
28. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
29. Shri K.B. Shanappa
30. Shri Arun Shourie
31. Smt. Viplove Thakur

                            SECRETARIAT

    1. Shri S.K. Sharma                — Additional Secretary
    2. Shri P.K. Bhandari              — Joint Secretary
    3. Shri Gopal Singh                — Director
    4. Shri D.R. Shekhar               — Deputy Secretary-II
    5. Smt. Jyochanamayi Sinha         — Under Secretary
    6. Smt. Indu Kaushal               — Executive Assistant
                              PREFACE


    I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2007-08) having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Twenty-Fourth Report on ‘Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirteenth
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘A Critical Review of Rehabilitation
of Displaced Persons.’

    2. The Thirteenth Report was presented to/laid in Lok Sabha and
Rajya Sabha on 3 August, 2006. The Government furnished replies
indicating action taken on the recommendations of the Committee
contained in the Report. The Committee took oral evidence of the
representatives of Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Rural
Development on 3 August, 2007 and 3 March, 2008 to have clarifications
on certain issues arising out of the action taken replies and to know
the salient features of the NPRR 2007. The draft Action Taken Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
6 September, 2007.

    3. An analysis of action taken by the Government on
recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Standing
Committee on Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in
Appendix-II.

    4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in
the body of the Report.




 N EW D ELHI;                             BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
12 March, 2008                                                 Chairman,
22 Phalguna, 1929   (Saka)               Standing Committee on Defence.




                                  (iv)
                            CHAPTER I

                              REPORT

    The Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Thirteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘A
Critical Review of Rehabilitation of Displaced Persons’ which was
presented and laid in both the Houses of Parliament on 03.08.2006.

    2. In the Thirteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha), the Committee
had made 57 observations/recommendations            on the following
aspects :

Sl.No.      Para No.                          Subject

1               2                               3

1.       1.7 to 1.15           Introduction

2.       2.11 and 2.12         Procedure for maintaining transparency
                               while acquiring land

3.       2.14                  Section 8 (Land to be marked out,
                               measured and planned) of the Land
                               Acquisition Act, 1894

4.       2.18                  Section 17 (Special power in case of
                               urgency) of the Land Acquisition Act

5.       2.24                  Payment     of compensation          and
                               determination of market value

6.       2.34 & 2.35           Releasing of surplus defence land for
                               carrying out developmental activities

7.       2.36 to 2.38          Technology

8.       2.53 & 2.54           Court cases

9.       2.59 & 2.60           National Policy on Resettlement and
                               Rehabilitation (NPRR)

10.      2.63                  Provisions to deal with cases prior to
                               2004
                                 2

1             2                                 3

11.    2.66                   Better Packages

12.    2.73                   Applicability criteria

13.    2.84 to 2.86           Rehabilitation and Resettlement Benefits
                              for Project Affected Families

14.    2.91 & 2.92            Training/Education

15.    2.104 & 2.105          Sharing of responsibility alongwith the
                              State Government

16.    2.106 & 2.107          Grievance Redressal Cell

17.    3.8 & 3.9              Naval Alternate OP Base, District Vizag,
                              Andhra Pradesh

18.    3.14 & 3.15            Propellant Factory, Nalanda, Bihar

19.    3.19 & 3.20            Army Project at           District      Avery,
                              Himachal Pradesh

20.    3.34 & 3.35            Pr oject Seabird,        District      Karwar,
                              Karnataka

21.    3.38                   National     Defence        Academy,
                              Khadakwasala, Distt. Pune, Maharashtra

22.    3.42                   Talegaon Dabhade,           District     Pune,
                              Maharashtra

23.    3.51 & 3.52            Acquisition during Second World War

24.    3.61 to 3.64           Ordnance Factory, Project Badmal,
                              Bolangir, Orissa

25.    3.69                   Mahajan Field Firing Range, District
                              Bikaner, Rajasthan

26.    3.75 & 3.76            Naval Air Station, District Arakonam,
                              Tamil Nadu

27.    3.85 & 3.86            Air Force Station, District            Tanjore
                              (Thanjavur) Tamil Nadu

28.    3.90                   Delhi

     3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the
                                      3

Report. The Committee have examined the Action Taken Replies
received from the Ministry and the same have been categorized as
follows:

      (i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted
          by the Government:
          Para Nos: 1.12, 1.14, 2.14, 2.18, 2.38, 2.53, 2.54, 3.8, 3.9, 3.19,
          3.20, 3.34, 3.35, 3.52 and 3.69
      (ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not
           desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
          Para No.: 3.90
     (iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
           of the Government have not been accepted by the
           Committee:
          Para Nos. 1.7, 1.8, 1.10, 1.11, 1.13, 2.11, 2.24, 2.34 to 2.37,
          2.59, 2.60, 2.63, 2.66, 2.73, 2.84, 2.85, 2.86, 2.91, 2.92, 2.104 to
          2.107, 3.14, 3.15, 3.51, 3.61 to 3.64, 3.75, 3.76, 3.85 and 3.86
     (iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
          replies of the Government are still awaited.
          Para Nos. 1.9, 1.15, 2.12, 3.38 and 3.42

     4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given
to the implementation of the recommendations accepted by the
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for any reason to
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter
should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee desire that action taken notes on
the recommendations/observations contained in Chapter–I and final
replies to the recommendations contained in Chapter–V of the Report
be furnished to the Committee within six months of the presentation
of the Report.

     5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations contained in
Chapter-I of this report. Chapter-I deals with the recommendations of
the Committee on which replies furnished by the Ministry are not
satisfactory and are not accepted by the Committee or replies to the
recommendations of the Committee have been accepted, but still in
some areas of implementation, the Committee want to further comment
or seek more detailed information. Accordingly in Chapter-I of the
Action Taken Report, further comments, recommendations on some of
                                      4

the replies have been given/made by the Committee for further reply/
seeking action taken statement from the Ministry. The Ministry shall
as early as possible, after the presentation of this report, furnish
statements of action taken or proposed to be taken by them on the
recommendations contained in the Chapter-I and the final replies to
the recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this report.

Need to have a comprehensive rehabilitation policy

Recommendation Para Nos. 1.7, 1.8, 1.10, 1.13, 2.12, 2.59, 2.60, 2.63,
 2.66, 2.73, 2.84, 2.85, 2.86, 2.91, 2.92, 2.104, 2.105, 2.106 and 2.107

               Recommendation (Para Nos. 1.7 & 1.13)

     6. The Committee had noted that Ministry of Defence had been
acquiring vast tracts of land before Independence and till date for
operational use of defence forces and other defence purposes. The
land was being acquired under age old Land Acquisition Act (LAA),
1894 and Defence of India Act., 1939 framed during the British time
and were colonial in nature. Though these Acts had been amended
from time to time, they were totally inadequate to meet the present
day needs and aspirations of the people. This was amply brought out
during oral evidences, tendered before the Committee by representatives
of Ministry of Law, Rural Development and State Government officials.
The Committee were constrained to note that there was no policy for
rehabilitation of Displaced persons as such and only in 2004, guidelines
had been issued in the form of National Policy on Resettlement and
Rehabilitation (NPRR), 2003. In the absence of a policy for rehabilitation,
the displaced persons were being given meagre compensation for the
land acquired for defence projects and no effort was being made to
resettle and rehabilitate them properly. In view of foregoing, the
Committee strongly felt that there was an urgent need to have a
comprehensive and more democratic legislation to deal with the matter
relating to Land Acquisition,        Compensation, Resettlement and
Rehabilitation. The Ministry of Defence being the largest user of land
should take appropriate initiatives with the concerned Ministries in
this regard. The Committee further desired that the Ministry of Defence
should have their own practical and better package for resettlement
and rehabilitation till the commencement of this comprehensive
legislation.

   7. The Committee had noted that the Ministry of Defence had
adopted NPRR 2003 formulated by Ministry of Rural Development
which had not been given legislative shape by the Government and
hence was not enforceable in the court of law. Moreover, it was only
                                     5

applicable to the projects having more than 500 families in the plain
areas and more than 250 families in hilly areas and therefore most of
the projects of Ministry of Defence did not come under its purview.
The Committee wished to recommend that the Ministry of Defence
must evolve their own rehabilitation policy which was more liberal
and was applicable to all the projects irrespective of the number of
displaced families as a kind of social responsibility of the Government.

    8. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:

    “In so far as having better packages for resettlement and
    rehabilitation as recommended by the Committee, it is mentioned
    that National Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation for Project
    Affected Families (NPRR) – 2003, is already under consideration
    in the Ministry of Rural Development for revision. We may await
    its finalisation. In so far as the need to have comprehensive and
    more democratic legislation to deal with the matters relating to
    Land Acquisition cases, it is mentioned that Ministry of Rural
    Development, the nodal agency for Land Acquisition Act, has
    already formulated draft Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill 2004.
    The draft LA (Amendment) Bill 2004 has been circulated by
    Ministry of Rural Development to all State Governments and UT
    Governments for their comments.”

                    Recommendation (Para No. 1.8)

    9. The Committee had noted that large number of people sacrificed
their ancestral land, traditional occupations and livelihoods due to
acquisition of land for various Defence purposes. Therefore, it becomes
the responsibility of the Ministry of Defence to ensure that the affected
people get fair amount of compensation and timely rehabilitation in
order to create a sense of pride and patriotic feeling in their mind that
they had sacrificed their invaluable property for the cause of the nation.

    10. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:

    “It may be mentioned that within the existing framework of Land
    Acquisition Act, there is no role of acquiring Department regarding
    determination of fair amount of compensation. It is determined as
    per provisions prescribed in Land Acquisition Act, by the Collector/
    Courts. Section 23 of the Act relates to determination of
    compensation. It reads as follows:—

    23 (1) In determining the amount of compensation to be awarded
    for land acquired under this Act, the Court shall take into
    consideration:—
                                    6

   First, the market value of the land at the date of the publication
   of the notification under section 4, sub section (1);

   Secondly, the damage sustained by the person interested, by reason
   of the taking of any standing crops or trees when may be on the
   land at the time of the Collector’s taking possession thereof;

   the time of the Collector’s taking possession of the land, by reason
   of severing such land from his other land;

   Fourthly, the damage ( if any) sustained by the person interested,
   at the time of the Collector’s taking possession of the land, by
   reason of the acquisition injuriously affecting his other property,
   movable or immovable, in any other manner, or his earnings;

   Fifthly, if, in consequence of the acquisition of the land by the
   Collector the reasonable expenses (if any) incidental to such change;
   and

   Sixthly, the damage (if any) bona fide resulting from diminution
   of the profits of the land between the time of the publication of
   the declaration under section 6 and the time of the Collector’s
   taking possession of the land.

   “(1-A) In addition to the market value of the land, as above
   provided, the Court shall in every case award an amount calculated
   at the rate of twelve per centum per annum on such market value
   for the period commencing on and from the date of the publication
   of the notification under section 4, sub section(1), in respect of
   such land to the date of the award of the Collector or the date of
   taking possession of the land, whichever is earlier.

   Explanation—In computing the period referred to in this sub section,
   any period or periods during which the proceedings for the
   acquisition of the land were held up on account of any stay or
   injunction by the order of any Court shall be excluded.

   (2) In addition to the market value of the land as above provided,
   the court shall in every case award a sum of (thirty per centum)
   on such market value, in consideration of compulsory nature of
   the acquisition.”

    2. It may further be mentioned that the Ministry of Rural
Development has proposed draft amendments to Land Acquisition Act,
1894. The draft Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2004 has been
                                    7

circulated by the Ministry of Rural Development             to all State
Governments and UT Governments for their comments.

                   Recommendation (Para No. 1.10)

    11. On examining various representations and oral evidences of
the displaced families who had lost their lands due to defence
acquisition over the years, the Committee had noted that most of
them had not been properly resettled and rehabilitated and were still
suffering. The Committee desired that Government should consider
their cases sympathetically and extend all possible assistance wherever
feasible.

    12. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:

    “Ministry of Defence has adopted National Policy on Resettlement
    and Rehabilitation for Project Affected Families (NPRR) – 2003,
    since 2004. This policy is being applied for all projects being
    considered since then. Hence, for projects executed earlier to 2004
    it is not possible to apply this policy. However, it may be
    mentioned that in certain projects even in the past, on the requests
    of respective State Governments, rehabilitation grants were
    sympathetically considered.”

                   Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)

    13. The Committee were distressed to note that, till now, the
Government acquired the land and displaced the people in the first
instance and allocate land to rehabilitate and resettle them at a later
stage. As a result, the people, who had sacrificed their land for the
cause of the nation, had to undergo manifold sufferings for years
together. Therefore, the Committee desired that the acquiring authority/
Ministry of Defence should take necessary initiatives to undertake an
advance planning for suitable rehabilitation and resettlement of the
displaced persons and convey the same to the affected people so as to
maintain transparency and gain their confidence.

    14. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:

    “Ministry of Defence has adopted National Policy on Resettlement
    and Rehabilitation for Project Affected Families (NPRR) – 2003,
    formulated by Ministry of Rural Development, as policy document
    for resettlement and rehabilitation. However, revision        of the
    NPRR-2003 and formulation of the National Rehabilitation Policy–
    2006, is under consideration of Ministry of Rural Development.
                                    8

    The proposed “National Rehabilitation Policy–2006” may address
    the issues relating to planning the size and nature of Rehabilitation
    packages. We may await its formulation.”

 Recommendation (Para Nos. 2.59, 2.60, 2.66, 2.73, 2.84, 2.85, 2.91,
              2.92, 2.104, 2.105, 2.106 and 2.107)

    15. The Committee had observed that prior to 2003, there was no
policy for granting rehabilitation assistance to the persons, displaced
by the acquisition of land. In 2003, National Policy on Resettlement &
Rehabilitation (NPRR) for Project Affected Families was formulated by
the Ministry of Rural Development. This had been notified in
Government of India Gazette on 17.2.2004. The Committee, while
examining the subject, had also examined the provisions of National
Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation (NPRR), 2003. The Committee
were given to understand that this policy provides only guidelines for
the Ministries which were not enforceable in the Court of Law, unless
the same was passed by the Parliament in the form of an Act.

     16. The Committee were constrained to note that even after
59 years of independence, there         was no law or rule governing
resettlement and rehabilitation and the Government of India was
following the age old colonial laws for this purpose. Therefore, the
Committee had strongly recommended that the Government must gave
a serious thought to bring a Bill for giving a legislative shape to the
Rehabilitation/Resettlement Policy at the earliest.

     17. The Committee were given to understand that many Public
Sector Undertakings, Departments, Ministries and State Governments
were offering better rehabilitation package. Even the Ministry of Rural
Development had communicated to all the Central Government
Ministries and Departments that National Policy on Resettlement and
Rehabilitation (NPRR) only specifies the minimum benchmark and they
could offer higher package. However, the Committee were constrained
to note that the Ministry of Defence were satisfied with the policy and
had adopted it as its rehabilitation policy and there was no proposal
to frame a separate, more liberal policy. The Committee deplored the
callous attitude of Ministry of Defence and strongly recommended
that the Ministry of Defence should adopt a practical and liberal
approach and frame their own policy having better packages for the
betterment of affected families which might be treated as a model
packages for other Departments/Ministries to follow.

   18. The Committee had noted that the provisions of NPRR-2003
were applicable in the case of displacement of 500 families or more in
                                    9

plain area and 250 families or more in hilly areas. The Committee
had, however, noted that most of the Defence Projects did not come
under the purview of NPRR, since they did not meet the criteria
mentioned in it. The Committee felt that the criteria given in NPRR
were vague and not practical. Therefore, the Committee wished to
recommend that the Ministry of Defence must evolved its own
rehabilitation policy which would be applicable to all the projects,
irrespective of the number of displaced families, as a kind of social
responsibility of the Government.

    19. The Committee had observed that compulsory acquisition of
private lands displaces persons from their ancestral land and property
forcing them to give up their home, assets and means of livelihood.
Therefore, displacement uproots people not just from their homes but
also from their traditional occupations and livelihood they were familiar
with. The system of extending cash compensation under             the Land
Acquisition Act (LAA) and such other Acts in most cases did not
enable the affected families to obtain cultivable agricultural land, home,
means of livelihood and other resources. To address these problems,
the NPRR 2003 was notified by Government of India and came into
force w.e.f. 2004. The Committee had examined the provisions of
rehabilitation and resettlement benefits and were of the view that the
objectives of NPRR were not properly reflected in the provisions. The
Committee had, therefore, wished to recommend that resettlement/
rehabilitation should be location-specific, situation-specific and
community-specific. In coastal village, fishermen should be resettled in
another coastal area only because they were accustomed to continue
with their traditional occupation and to earn perpetual income
therefrom. A village having tribal population should be resettled in a
homogenous area having their own people, so that they did not feel
out of place.

     20. The Committee had further recommended that the rehabilitation
site must have skill based training, education and different types of
occupational provisions, suitable to the local community. Besides, the
rehabilitation package should provide village roads, drinking water,
primary medical facilities.

    21. The Committee were distressed to note that development and
implementation of rehabilitation package, including providing training,
education, employment, housing, health and sanitation was the sole
responsibility of the State Government. The Ministry of Defence just
provides the money to the State Governments as per their demand for
implementation of the rehabilitation package. The Ministry of Defence
                                    10

did not have any mechanism/trained manpower to supervise the actual
implementation. The Committee had strongly felt that in case of
compulsory displacement, the oustees not only lose their land and
ancestral properties but also their vocation and means of livelihood
for the cause of development of the whole nation. Therefore, our
country, being a welfare State, must strive to provide training,
education, employment, facilities for potable water, health services and
sanitation to help the families of the oustees to re-establish economic
sustenance and the basic livelihood. The Committee had further desired
that to enable the oustees to carry out their traditional job in a more
scientific way and to pursue new vocational courses, the Government
should establish ITI and other vocational institutions in the
rehabilitation sites. Besides, the Government should provide
simultaneous training facilities to the youth of displaced families as
per the job requirements of the defence projects so as to enable them
to avail employment opportunity in the said project. The Government
should consider to provide some gainful employment to the oustees.

    22. The Committee had strongly felt that the Ministry of Defence
should share the responsibility with the State Government by
appointing an Estate Officer to coordinate and monitor the rehabilitation
projects, being executed by the State Government, for effective
implementation of rehabilitation package.

     23. The Committee had observed that prior to 2004, the Ministry
of Defence was paying rehabilitation grants to the concerned State
Governments as per their demands. Planning, acquisition and
monitoring of the rehabilitation projects was the sole responsibility of
the respective State Governments. The Ministry of Defence was not
associated with the monitoring mechanism alongwith the State
Government. However, the Defence Estate Officer used to maintain a
constant liaison with the Collectors at the field level to see the progress
of land acquisition. The Committee further observed that in many
cases, the affected persons had not been resettled and rehabilitated
due to various reasons. As a result, cases were still going on in various
courts for years together.

     24. The Committee were distressed to note that the Ministry of
Defence was only concerned to maintain constant liaison with the State
Government authorities to see the progress of land acquisition and
not with the progress of rehabilitation and resettlement. The Ministry
of Defence left this crucial task at the mercy of the State Government.
The Committee had strongly felt that the acquiring agency should not
shift the total responsibility to the State Governments. Therefore, the
                                   11

Committee had strongly recommended that the Ministry of Defence
must ask the State Government to furnish regular feedback in time
and examine all the pending cases where people had not been given
their dues or where they had not been resettled or rehabilitated and
the accountability must be fixed. The Ministry should also involve
themselves with the State Government and solve the old cases as part
of their social obligation. In addition, the Committee had desired that
a Floor Level Committee comprising a representative of Ministry of
Defence, District Administration (Collector) and affected persons might
be constituted to oversee the effective implementation of rehabilitation
and resettlement, starting from Gazette notification to actual
rehabilitation and it should be given a legal status. The Committee
had further desired that in the comprehensive legislation on land
acquisition, resettlement and rehabilitation as proposed by the
Committee in their earlier paragraph, it should be taken care of. The
Ministry of Defence should delegate powers for monitoring the
rehabilitation and ensure accountability.

    25. The Committee had observed that, at the higher level, as per
Para 7.2.1 of the National Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation,
the State Government should constitute a Grievance Redressal Cell
under the Chairmanship of the Revenue Commissioner for Resettlement
and Rehabilitation for redressal of Grievances of the project affected
families. The aggrieved families might move a petition to this Cell for
redressal of their grievances. The form and manner in which and the
time within which the complaints might be made to the Grievance
Redressal Cell and disposed of, should be prescribed by the State
Government.

     The Committee were distressed to note that the policy was silent
in regard to form and manner in which the complaints might be made
to the Grievance Redressal Cell and the time within which it would
be disposed of. Everything had been left to the whims and caprices of
the State Government. Therefore, the Committee had desired that the
provision of the policy might be thoroughly reviewed and everything
should be specified in the policy itself in order to avoid ambiguity
and misinterpretation and the Grievance Redressal Cell should include
District Collector, representative of Ministry of Defence and a
representative of the affected families.

    26. The Committee had observed that, in the three-layer structure
of monitoring mechanism, the Ministry of Defence participates only at
the National Level. At the lower and the middle levels, the Ministry
of Defence did not have any role to play. The Committee were of the
                                      12

strong view that, in order to ensure a meaningful rehabilitation, a
representative of Defence Estate Organisation should be made a
Member at all the levels of the monitoring mechanism.

    27. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:

    “These recommendations relate to amending policy frame work
    given in NPRR-2003. It is mentioned that there is a proposal under
    consideration with the Ministry of Rural Development for
    formulation of NPRR-2006 by revising the NPRR-2003. We may
    await its formulation.”

     28. During the Oral evidence, the representatives of Ministry of
Rural Development apprised the Committee, about the salient features
of the revised NPRR-2007 which was under consideration of Group of
Ministers (GoM), as under:

    “On the salient features which is available in the Draft Policy
    which is already circulated and was in public domain since
    September, 2006 is being given a final shape by the Group of
    Ministers, but the broad contours of the Policy remains the same
    with some minor calibrations.

    First of all, the scope of the Policy has been enhanced to include
    all people who are affected by involuntary displacement. Therefore,
    it is not merely the people who are losing the land              per se, but
    even people whose livelihood is being affected or in any way they
    are getting adversely affected. So all those people are sought to be
    covered under that. I have seen that the Committee in its
    recommendations has given a great emphasis on customizing the
    rehabilitation plan, if they are tribals or if there is a particular
    area. It has mentioned about the fisheries and all that. So in our
    policy we are considering it and then naturally it will be reflected
    in the law. After the initial assessment of the rehabilitation
    requirements, that is the number of persons who will be affected
    by this land acquisition, the Draft Rehabilitation Policy will be
    developed which will take into account these specific requirements.
    But, of course, in the Policy itself in categorical terms, there are
    special provisions for the tribal people for whom we are suggesting
    that there should be a special consideration for that. We are also
    suggesting the preparation of a Social Impact Assessment which
    will be mandatory in case of projects involving a certain threshold
    level of population which is about 400 families’          en masse in plain
    area and 200 en masse in tribal and hilly areas. So in preparing the
                               13

Social Impact Assessment,         once that is available, the draft
Rehabilitation Plan will then be customized. So the concern of this
Committee we are trying to factor through this approach. The
benefits which were enjoyed by tribals in the area where they
inhabited also should not be in diminished in any way if they are
shifted to another area. That is also another area of concern which
we have taken into consideration. For the Social Impact Assessment,
the public hearing will also be made mandatory and consultations
with the Gram Sabhas will be taken into account. The housing
benefit is something which the Committee has recommended and
given its very strong endorsement. We are providing this benefit
to the project affected people in the Draft Policy. We are also
considering about preference in jobs. The Committee has made a
strong recommendation that skill development should precede that
so that they are enabled to participate in the job recruitment which
will take place in the project. That also we are taking care of and
we are making a strong provision for that. On the actual
compensation, very liberal package are being recommended.”

He further stated as under:

“The interesting point which the Committee has raised is whether
there is a limit which has been placed by the Department that is
in the Rehabilitation Policy, on the Ministries/Departments which
are acquiring bodies. What we can suggest and what are the GoM
will eventually approve, the current thinking is that this will
become a threshold level. That is the basic minimum which
everybody has to do. But the acquiring bodies which could be the
State Governments or the Central Government Ministers or public
sector undertakings would be free to raise the bar and give
something beyond that. In fact, you will be happy to know that
in the Orissa Policy which I was involved in developing that policy
along with my Additional Secretary who was also in Orissa, in
that we have made not only the provision for this liberal
management but we have also said that project-specific
additionalities can also be given. Whatever is prescribed in that
policy itself is the minimum, but for a particular project, it can be
customized and made a little more liberal. That is the philosophy
by which we are guided in developing this new policy. The various
privileges which people enjoyed like fishing rights, then access to
forest areas and all those things, we are trying to protect. If a
group of people who are getting shifted from a particular place
typically in the reservoir areas where an irrigation project comes,
the fishing rights will be given on high priority. In fact, more or
                                    14

    less on an exclusive basis to those people who are getting affected,
    through some mechanism whether they will form a cooperative or
    an association or whatever it is so that fishing right will be given
    to them.”

    He further stated as under:

    “There is also a concern which the Committee has expressed is
    about the Disputes Settlement Mechanism. Our current thinking is
    that we will put it on fast track and put strict time limits for
    settlement of disputes so that these do not linger for long period
    because our experience in this connection is that there are litigations
    which go on for many years.”

     29. When asked by the Committee about the latest position of
Rehabilitation Policy-2007, the Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development
inter alia during evidence on 3.3.08 stated as under:—

    “It is in the Bills form. It was presented to Parliament. The
    Parliament has referred it to the Standing Committee on Rural
    Development.”

    “They have been calling the various Ministers for evidence to give
    their views. We hope that in this Session the Committee will be
    able to give its Report. It can come before Parliament. The policy
    is in force.”

    30. On the total acquisition of land, displacement of families and
improvement which could be made in the present NPRR, the
representative of the Ministry of Defence stated as under:—

    “…About 27,000 acres have been acquired on ongoing projects and
    the displacement is about 6500 families. Generally, when providing
    for resettlement and rehabilitation, the policies of the State
    Government are followed. The Central Government’s policy is
    actually a fairly recent development and it has not yet been given
    a final shape. In any case, the Central Policy also stipulates that
    it is not binding. In the sense that in case the State policy goes
    beyond the Central policy then the best available package should
    be given. My own feeling is that the Defence Ministry should
    basically adopt this approach that if in particular State the package
    is better, then the State R&R package should be given. For example,
    we know that in some States because of large projects—States like
    Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat for example—the R&R packages are
    infact extremely generous. They go beyond the Central guidelines.
                                    15

    So, I think that so far this is the approach also that has been
    adopted that the resettlement has been in accordance with the
    package that has been posed to the Ministry of Defence by the
    State Government concerned and it has been done in accordance
    with that. But I would say that my own observation has been that
    in recent years there is a far greater awareness of R&R among the
    States. Most States have enacted their own R&R packages basically
    as a response in many cases to court directives, also as a response
    to the World Bank aided projects where R&R has been made a
    precondition of lending.”

             Recommendation (Para Nos. 2.63 and 2.86)

    31. The Committee had observed that there was no policy to deal
with rehabilitation and resettlement prior to 2004. Acquisition of land
and rehabilitation was the responsibility of the State Governments.
The Ministry of Defence was paying to the State Governments as per
their demand. The Ministry of Defence had adopted these guidelines
to deal with the cases from 2004 onwards and not to deal with earlier
cases. The Committee were pained to note that there were old cases
pending in the courts and in many cases people had not received
their dues and their suffering was prolonging. Keeping in mind the
large scale suffering of people and to provide justice to the common
man, who had sacrificed his ancestral property for the safety and
betterment of the nation, the Committee desired the Ministry to re-
think over this issue and take necessary approval of the competent
authority to provide a practical and liberal rehabilitation package to
the cases prior to 2004. The Committee had further desired that the
Ministry should have a constant liaisoning with the State Governments
to monitor the progress of rehabilitation and actual utilization of
monitory allocation provided by them for the said purpose.

    32. When asked by the Committee about the definition of pubic
purpose under which land is the acquired by the Ministry of Defence,
the representative of the Ministry stated as under:

    “The main definition of public purpose has only these two areas.
    That is one escape clause that I would come to. It is the strategic
    purposes relating to naval, military, air force, any other work vital
    to a State, and public infrastructure, which would have to be
    notified by the Central Government. It is not that the State
    Government would say that this project is a pubic infrastructure
    and they can go ahead with Section 4 (i) notification etc.”
                                     16

    “Now, they would have to come to the Central Government to
    establish their case that this project does meet public infrastructure
    or does meet the public interest criteria. Only then, they would be
    able to take it, and it would be only for these two purposes.”

    33. The Committee had further recommended that there had to be
some sort of coordination mechanism to monitor progress in regard to
actual disbursement of money made available to the State Government
by the Ministry of Defence.

    34. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:

    “For land acquisition projects prior to 2004, the NPRR-2004 is not
    proposed to be applied. However, in some projects rehabilitation
    grants have already been provided.

    As regards recommendations of the Committee to have constant
    liaisoning with State Governments to monitor the progress of
    rehabilitation and actual utilization of the money provided to them,
    it is mentioned that certain provisions are being made to take care
    of this in the proposed NPRR-2006.”

     35. During Oral evidence, the representatives of the Ministry of
Rural Development apprised the Committee about the importance of
Committee’s recommendation about representation of Defence Estate
in the local level Committee and also added as under:

    “I would like to mention is that you have made a very important
    suggestion that the representatives of the Defence Estate should be
    part of the local level Committee which should look into it. But,
    I think, the Defence Estate does not have too much interface on a
    day to day basis with the local people. During acquisition, they
    may come. Once the project is set up, they do not really have
    much interface. I would say that their relationship is like the
    umbilical cord which is cut after the child is born. So, in the State,
    if there is any other Defence Establishment or some officer who is
    locally available, who can interact with the local administration, it
    may be a better idea. In the initial stages, let the Defence Estate
    people be involved in it. But there is a Division Army or Air
    Force Formation in the State which is permanent. At the State
    level, there should be a Committee where senior officers of the
    Revenue Department or nominee of the State Government should
    be there. At the district level, there should be a middle-level officer
    of the Army and the Collector. They should then look after these
    because they can have harmonious interaction.
                                   17

    We are in agreement to that. We want this minor change because
    the Estate people do not have a presence in every State. The Army
    Formations are in touch with the State Government either for
    Disaster Management or for support on a day-to-day basis. They
    should take care of it. I think that may be a better idea.”

    36. The Committee note from the reply that the Ministry of
Defence are not serious to the concern expressed by the Committee
in their report. The Ministry have simply advanced their replies to
the Committee without doing the comprehensive home work of the
issues involved therein. The Committee are of the view that the
project affected displaced families, who have sacrificed their home,
ancestral land, age old occupation and livelihood for the cause of
the nation, must be given their legitimate right of resettlement and
rehabilitation in a dignified way. The Committee are not satisfied
with the reply of the Ministry to change-over their responsibility to
the Ministry of Rural Development in the matter of policy
formulation and preparation of better and attractive package for
rehabilitation instead of having their own practical and better package
for resettlement and rehabilitation of displaced families. The
Committee are further concerned to note that the Ministry of Defence
are still waiting for the revision of NPRR-2003 and Land Acquisition
Act. The Committee feel that revision of NPRR-2003 and getting the
proposed draft Land Acquisition Bill amended is a time consuming
process and more over the Government has not indicated any time
schedule for the purpose. The Committee, therefore, have come to
conclusion that the Ministry of Defence are inclined to bank upon
the age old colonial acts/policies for resettlement and are not receptive
to bring any positive and flexible changes/improvements in the
existing system, under which the poor people may not undergo any
more suffering for no fault of their own. Further the existing
rehabilitation policy is in the form of guidelines only and does not
have any legal sanctity.

    37. The Committee, therefore, had strongly recommended that
the Ministry of Defence being the largest land acquiring authority
for operational use of Defence forces and other Defence purposes,
should have their own liberal rehabilitation policy to deal with new
as well as old cases for which the present NPRR-2003 may not impose
any ban/restrictions.

    38. The Committee are, however, surprised to learn that despite
their recommendation that Ministry of Defence should have their
own practical and better package for resettlement and rehabilitation,
                                  18

the Ministry are solely dependent on National Policy on Resettlement
and Rehabilitation for Project Affected Families (NPRR), 2003 for
the displaced families affected by the Defence projects. The
Committee note that NPRR-2003 is only applicable to the projects
having more than 500 families in plain areas and more than 250
families in hilly areas, as most of the projects of Ministry of Defence
are outside the populous areas therefore they do not come under the
purview of NPRR-2003. The Committee are, however, constrained to
observe that the Ministry have not touched upon any aspect of it in
their action taken reply as to what steps they are taking to facilitate
the project affected persons whose number of families are less than
500 and 250 in plain and hilly areas respectively. The Ministry of
Defence must realize as candidly accepted by the Ministry of Rural
Development that NPRR-2003 provides the minimum bench mark
and any Department/Ministry is free to adopt a comprehensive and
liberal rehabilitation package. In this connection, the Committee fail
to understand as to why the Ministry of Defence cannot provide a
better package for the displaced families like other Departments/
Ministries of the Government of India. Therefore, the Committee
reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Ministry should have
a comprehensive and more democratic legislation to deal with the
matter relating to Land Acquisition, Compensation, Resettlement and
Rehabilitation urgently and the Committee may be apprised of the
action taken in this regard.

    39. The Committee, however, are happy to note that the Ministry
of Rural Development have gone through considerably the report of
the Committee containing recommendations               on ‘Review of
Rehabilitation of Displaced Persons’ and assured the Committee that
issues viz . enhancement of the scope of the Policy, customizing the
rehabilitation Plan for tribals, social impact assessment, case of
projects involving a certain threshold level of population, out of
court settlement, consultation with Gram Sabha, skill development
for Job, involvement of Defence Estate people with local
administration and to provide very liberal package to the affected
families have been adequately addressed in the NPRR-2007. NPRR-
2007 are now in process of enactment as it has been referred to
Committee on Rural Development in the form of Rehabilitation and
re-settlement Bill, 2007. The Committee hope that soon NPRR-2007
will come in force in the form of an Act.

                  Recommendation (Para No. 1.11)

    40. The Committee had noted that the Ministry of Defence was
extending funds to the State Government for rehabilitation packages
                                   19

as per their demands. The Committee desired that the Ministry must
take regular feed back from the State Government on the
implementation of rehabilitation programme and in case of non-
implementation and delay, the accountability might be fixed. The
Committee also desired the Ministry to ensure that the funds given to
States for the rehabilitation programme were not misused or diverted
for other projects. The Committee had also observed that in some
cases in the absence of any demand of the State Government, the
displaced persons had not been given any rehabilitation package.
Therefore, the Committee had strongly recommended that the
Government should address this issue in the right perspective to ensure
that the displaced persons were rightfully rehabilitated.

    41. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:

    “Ministry of Defence has written to all State Governments and
    Union Territories Administration to issue necessary directions to
    all District Collectors that proper feedback regarding rehabilitation
    programme of displaced persons, whenever the land is acquired
    for Ministry of Defence and where rehabilitation grants are given
    by Ministry of Defence, should be given to the concerned Defence
    Estates Officers. Further, it is also mentioned that National Policy
    on Resettlement and Rehabilitation for Project Affected Families
    (NPRR)–2003, is under revision with the Ministry of Rural
    Development. We may await its finalisation.”

    42. From the reply of the Ministry, the Committee observe that
Ministry are not serious to implement the important recommendations
of the Committee. As regard the recommendation of the Committee,
on taking regular feed back from the State Governments on the
implementation of the Rehabilitation Programme and in case of non-
implementation and delay, the accountability to be fixed. The
Committee are unhappy to note that the Ministry of Defence have
become content by mere convening/passing the recommendations of
the Committee to the State Governments and Union Territories
Administration to issue necessary directions to all District Collectors.
Thereafter, the Ministry are not bothered to know what feed back
on the issue have been received from the State Governments/District
Collectors and what course of action has been taken or proposed to
be taken for better resettlement and rehabilitation of the suffered
families in order to enable them to live dignified life. The Committee
take this fact with due seriousness and further strongly reiterate
their recommendation that Government should address this issue
with due seriousness in the right perspective to ensure that the
displaced persons are rightfully rehabilitated in true sense.
                                    20

    43. The Committee are of the opinion that the acquiring authority
must take responsibility to Resettlement and Rehabilitation of the
affected persons and give feed back to the Committee of the progress
made by the Government in this regard as was done by the Ministry
of Defence in the case of Project Sea Bird of Navy. The Ministry of
Defence should take lead to monitor and implement the
Rehabilitation Package. The Committee would like to know the
compliance made by the Ministry in this regard.

Court Cases

              Recommendation (Para Nos. 1.14 and 2.53)

                   Recommendation (Para No. 1.14)

    44. The Committee had also noted that a large number of cases
regarding payment of compensation were pending in various courts.
Therefore, the Committee desired that the Ministry of Defence should
try to settle these cases out of court through negotiations and
reconciliations.

    45. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:

    “The matter regarding settlement of cases through Lok Adalat can
    be considered on case-by-case basis wherever feasible.”

    46. On the issue of out of court settlement during oral evidence of
the representatives of Ministry of Defence stated as under:

    “Actually, the agenda for Lok Adalats is normally set by the High
    Court of the State concerned. They decide the case. Normally, there
    is one judge who is assigned to the Lok Adalats and he decides
    the kind of cases that they will take up. They do it district-wise
    normally depending upon the problem in that district. We have
    no objection if disputes are settled through Lok Adalats provided
    the High Court agrees to it. So far, I am told that 42 cases have
    been settled out of court regarding acquisition by the Ministry of
    Defence. If the number increases, it will be good. As far as possible,
    we would like that there should be no disputes and in fact, when
    compensation packages are generous, there are no disputes usually.”

     47. On the same issue during oral evidence of the representatives
of the Ministry of Rural Development stated as under:

    “One is out of court settlement. Frankly, this issue has not come
    up. We will carry this concern to the GoM and try to see that this
    issue is addressed, but we are addressing it in a different manner.
                                   21

    Even today, under the Act, there is a provision for Consent Award.
    But we are trying to address it in a more fundamental way, which
    is also another concern of the Committee, that is, to minimize the
    time for litigation and provide the third approach, which we are
    trying to make to minimize disputes. We are also trying to have
    a mechanism by which the determination of price is there as the
    hon. Member from Kashmir mentioned. So, we are trying to make
    it as closer to the realistic prices as possible. We are suggesting
    many methods and that is how we are going to address these
    issues.”

                  Recommendation (Para No. 2.53)

     48. The Committee had noted with concern that about 15650 cases
were pending in lower courts, High Court and Supreme Court
regarding compensation paid to the persons whose land was acquired
by the Government for Defence purposes. The Committee are surprised
to note that in most of the old cases where acquisition had been
completed and even after the people accepted the compensation and
land had been taken over, still litigation was going on. The Committee
were concerned to note that significant number of cases relating to
compensation had been pending in the Courts for a long time, due to
dispute in ownership or appeal preferred by the State Government
against the enhanced compensation awarded by the lower court. The
Committee understood that in rural areas many persons live in a joint
family and occupies a piece of ancestral land without having a legal
document in their favour. Such a property was invariably declared by
the acquiring authority as a disputed property and compensation was
either not paid or withheld. Therefore, the Committee were of the
view that for identification of owner of such property, Government
should apply the law of limitation and take note of genuine possession
of land, views of the local panchayat and Gazetted Officer of that
local area. The Committee had also felt that Law Officer of the Central
Government might be posted as designated office of the Defence Estate
to give timely advise regarding processing of litigations arising out of
land acquisition. The Ministry of Law had to play pro-active role in
this regard. Looking to the past experience, it might be seen that most
of the cases were relating to award of land compensation had been
decided in favour of the displaced persons. The Committee had,
therefore, strongly recommended that Government should follow a
flexible and logical policy in such matters to pay the compensation,
and the State Government instead of filing appeal against the enhanced
award of reference court, should come forward for reconciliation/
negotiation to settle the dispute finally outside the Court.
                                     22

    49. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:

    “The Ministry of Law and Justice has already been requested to
    post a Law Officer in the Office of DGDE to give advice for
    processing of litigation arising out of land acquisition.

    As regards settling the matter through reconciliation and
    negotiation, it is mentioned that Government may resort to settling
    the cases through Lok Adalats on case by case basis, wherever
    feasible.”

     50. On being asked whether the District Collector is strictly
following the Supreme Court Judgements and Central Government
Guidelines while determining the market value of land and standing
crops. The Ministry of Rural Development in their written replies stated
as under:

    “Since land is a State subject under the Constitution of India, it is
    for the State Governments to ensure that the District Collectors
    are following the judgements of the Hon’ble Supreme Court.”

   51. On a specific query about the leading cases of the Supreme
Court in determination of market value. The Ministry of Rural
Development in their written replies stated as under:

    “A request has been made to the Ministry of Law and Justice for
    providing a brief on the leading cases of the Supreme Court in
    determination of market value of land under acquisition”.

    “We have just sent a reference to the Law Ministry to find out
    whether this can be applied with retrospective effect or not. Once
    that gets clarified and if we can notify our Authority, it can be
    done with retrospective effect, then, all the matters could be referred
    to that Authority”.

    52. The Committee note that the Ministry have admitted that
the matter regarding settlement of cases through Lok Adalats can be
considered on case to case basis wherever feasible. The Committee,
however, are not satisfied with the reply advanced by the Ministry
as they have not given considered thought of the Committee’s
recommendations on solving the matter of disputed property by way
of identification of such property through genuine possession of
land, application of law of limitation, views of gazetted officer/local
Panchayat of that area etc. This also shows that the Ministry are not
serious at all to implement the considered and well thought
                                   23

recommendations of the Committee. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that the Ministry of Defence must gear up their
sluggish machinery in order to yield desired results. The Committee
are of the view that for successful planning, implementation of
scheme must be done in a time-bound manner otherwise it will
defeat the very purpose of the scheme. Therefore, the Committee
desire that the Ministry must take concerted efforts to settle the
pending cases out of the court through negotiations and reconciliation
in a true spirit at the earliest.

    53. The Committee feel that the litigation in courts take years to
come to any conclusion, thereby wasting precious time, energy and
money for both the parties, which otherwise would have been spent
for constructive and meaningful purpose. Therefore, the Committee
are of the view that the Ministry of Defence should take initiative
to impress the Ministry of Rural Development to include the
provision of Out of Court Settlements in the proposed rehabilitation
and re-settlement Bill, 2007 so that affected persons could get their
legitimate dues without delay.

    54. The Committee agree with the reply of the Ministry of Rural
Development that the land is a State subject under the Constitution
of India and it is for the State Governments to ensure that the
District Collectors do follow the judgements of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court. On the other hand, the Committee are of the view that
Ministry should not feel content with the fact that since land is a
subject matter of the State Governments they have been absolved
from all the liabilities. The Committee, however, are of the view
that a better coordination, monitoring and follow up of the
rehabilitation related issues directly with the District Collectors will
not only mitigate the problems of affected persons but also make
the people more government friendly and less litigating in nature.
The Committee are of the view that if liberal and timely
rehabilitation packages are offered, people will happily part with
their land, houses and belongings in the interest of the nation.

Serving of individual notification pertaining to intention of the
Government to acquire land

                  Recommendation (Para No. 2.11)

    55. The Committee had noted that as per clause 4 of Land
Acquisition Act (LAA), 1894, the Government communicate to the
landowner its intention to acquire land by publishing Gazette
notification in two Daily Newspapers circulated in that locality, of
                                    24

which at least one was in regional language. Also, public notice of
this notification was pasted at convenient places in the locality where
land was being acquired. The Committee felt that this was not sufficient
and desired that individual notifications should be served to the
affected persons. The Committee were further of the view that this
procedure might be convenient and helpful in places having literate
inhabitants. However, in hilly and remote areas with low literacy people
might not be aware of the notification and the procedures and
formalities that were required to be completed for filing objections.
Therefore, the Committee strongly felt that the Government must evolve
a people friendly approach and desire that a representative of the
acquiring authority, in this case        i.e. DGDE, alongwith the District
Administration should serve individual notifications and go to the
affected people or local panchayat and brief them regarding the
intention of the Government and assist them in completing formalities/
filing their objections, if any, in writing. Further there should be some
follow-up action in this regard. The Committee further desire that
while comprehensive review of the Land Acquisition Act was done by
the Government that aspects should be kept in mind.

    56. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:

    “The Ministry of Rural Development has been requested to take
    further    necessary action on this recommendation of the
    Committee and intimate     action taken thereon to Ministry of
    Defence.”

    57. The Committee do not agree with the reply of the Ministry
that the matter pertaining to serving of individual notifications to
the affected persons by the Directorate of General Defence Estate
(DGDE) along with district administration, has been referred to the
Ministry of Rural Development to take necessary action. The
Committee strongly feel that the Ministry of Defence, instead of
shifting their responsibility should assume accountability and adopt
a people’s friendly approach and the senior most officials of DGDE
should insist upon for serving individual notifications to the affected
persons in order to extend help to the people in hilly and remote
areas with low literacy rate. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their
earlier recommendation in this regard.

Determination of Market Value

                   Recommendation (Para No. 2.24)

    58. The Committee had noted that the compensation for land was
determined by the Collector in accordance with the provisions of
                                    25

Section 23 of the Land Acquisition Act. The Committee further observed
that the district Collector while determining market value, goes mostly
by the local information and registered sale data. But it was worth-
mentioning here that when the registration takes place, people normally
register at a lower rate to avoid stamp duty. Therefore, simply taking
into consideration the registered sale data while calculating the market
value was not fair and correct since it results into paying lesser
compensation to the affected persons than the actual market rate. This
had resulted in large number of affected persons filing cases in various
courts. The Committee further understood that in many cases, the
Court had awarded higher compensation than the award declared by
the District Collectors which the Government had to pay at a later
stage. To avoid all these litigations and give fair prices to the displaced
persons, the Committee desired that the recent guidelines issued by
the Government of India in regard to the computation of land value
be taken as a base improvement whereby prices were decided by
State Revenue Department for different zones and categories like
irrigated, unirrigated, urban, semi-urban, rural etc. The Government
should also take into account the Consumer Price Index for a particular
period for computing land value. This would facilitate the correct
evaluation of acquired property of the people. The Committee further
wished to recommend that the Ministry of Defence should insist the
State Government to take the assistance of land valuers/assessors and
follow the above-mentioned guidelines and had a constant liaisoning
with the State Government and monitor the progress of payment of
compensation to the affected persons and see that the Collector was
paying the market price by keeping in mind the above mentioned
factors. The Committee further desired that earnest efforts should be
made to settle the matter through negotiation/reconciliation. In case
of any dispute, the matter might be referred to Lok Adalat and if it
was beyond possible, the cases may be sent to arbitration where service
of the experts might be utilized. The Committee further desired that
while calculating the value of land and other property, the acquiring
authority must take a humanitarian approach and pay the compensation
accordingly.

    59. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:

    “The Committee has desired that with regard to the computation
    of land value, price of land decided by the State Revenue
    Department for different zones and category like irrigated and
                                   26

   unirrigated, urban, semi-urban, rural etc. be taken as basis and
   Govt. should also consider Consumer Price Index for correctly
   valuing the acquired property. In this regard it is submitted that
   there are a number of Supreme Court judgements on the issue as
   to how the market value of land is to be declared. In the Land
   Acquisition Act, the award of compensation is formulated by the
   Collector. He seeks the approval of the State Government and then
   declares the award. In many States there is also a Committee at
   the District level to help the Collector in valuing the prices of the
   land. For example, in Punjab there is a District Price Fixation
   Committee. In this Committee, members of public such as acting
   Chairman of Block Samiti, Rep. of MLA and Sarpanchs are also
   included.

   In so far as the reference to Lok Adalat is concerned, that needs
   to be decided on case-by-case basis depending on feasibility of
   adopting such a course of action .”

     60. The Committee have been informed that there are a number
of Supreme Court judgements and Central Government guidelines
on the issues related to determination of market value. In the Land
Acquisition Act, the award of compensation is formulated by the
Collector who finally gets the approval of the State Government.
The Committee observe that inspite of all the measures, a large
number of affected persons are filing cases in various courts and
the cases are pending in a large number. The Committee strongly
feel that the District Collector is not giving due attention to the
Supreme Court judgements and guidelines issued by the Central
Government regarding determination of market value. Therefore,
while reiterating their earlier recommendations, the Committee wish
to recommend that the Government should strictly follow the
Supreme Court judgments. The prices should be decided by the
State authorities for different zones and categories and the
Compensation should be given in a time-bound manner.

    61. The Committee further stress that earnest efforts should be
made to settle the matters through negotiation/reconciliation and the
Ministry must adopt a humanitarian approach and pay compensation
accordingly.

   62. Land acquiring authority, land owner and State authority
should sit together and decide the market value for the proposed
Rehabilitation Packages.
                                     27

Need to review the actual utilisation of defence land

           Recommendation (Para Nos. 2.34, 2.36 and 2.37)

Recommendation (Para Nos. 2.34 & 2.36)

     63. The Committee had observed that acquisition of land for
defence related activities was being done keeping in view the present
and future requirements. Requirement of land was established by a
Board of Officers as per given scale of land authorization and
acquisition was done based on laid down rules and procedures. The
Committee were, however, given to understand that in some projects,
like National Defence Academy (NDA) 8,000 acres of land was
acquired, out of which not more than 25 per cent, is utilized and rest
had remained unutilized even after 60 years. During the study visits
of the Committee to various projects, the Committee had observed
that there were large areas of defence land, lying unutilized and they
had not been given back to the ex-landowners. In this connection, the
Committee were informed that the users had to leave certain portion
of land as buffer zone and there were certain areas needed for future
expansion. Plan for using the land is there but due to constraints of
funds and other reasons the users were not in a position to utilize the
whole land. As a result, this gave a totally misleading impression that
the Defence Authority was acquiring land mindlessly.

     Since land was a scarce commodity the Committee desired that
the Ministry of Defence should set up a high level group to review
the total land acquired, actual utilization thereof and the requirement
of land in future for all Defence projects. During the review, the
Government should also see the possibilities to re-allocate the surplus
land, if any, to the affected people for the use of agricultural purposes,
on lease/contract basis. This would not only avoid resentment among
the people but also facilitate meaningful utilization of surplus land.

    64. The Committee had observed that technological development
was taking place very rapidly in India and world wide. It had wide
effect on different segments and way of working and requirements of
the Government. The Committee were of the view that keeping in
view the rapid development of technology Ministry of Defence must
review its decision on requirement of vast acquisition of land for
Defence purposes and its likely use.

    65. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:

    “The above recommendations of the Standing Committee have been
    considered in the Ministry of Defence and it has been decided
                                   28

    with the approval of Raksha Mantri to constitute Committees at
    each Command level in the Ministry of Defence to review the
    land acquired by Ministry of Defence and its utilization and actual
    requirement. Necessary orders in this regard have been issued.”

Recommendation (Para No. 2.37)

     66. The Committee had observed that in many projects, the
Ministry of Defence was having surplus land. For carrying out
developmental activities, like widening of road of National Highways,
State Highways or the village approach road, when the concerned
authorities approach the Ministry of Defence, the request was examined
at the ground level and was turned down without sending it to the
highest authority. Therefore, the Committee had strongly felt that there
must be a mechanism in the Ministry of Defence at the highest level
to examine these issues and facilitate the developmental activities
without affecting the security of the nation.

    67. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:

    “The land policy of Ministry of Defence envisages that no defence
    land is to be declared surplus. If any land is to be given up, it
    should be on exchange of land of equal value basis. However, the
    demands of the State Governments/Central                Government/
    Undertakings etc. can be considered on the basis of merits of each
    case. Generally, the requests received from such organizations for
    defence land are considered in consultation with Army Authorities
    and the Director-General of Defence Estates and decisions taken at
    appropriate levels in the Ministry.”

    68. The Committee observe that the replies of the Ministry to
the recommendations/observations at para Nos. 2.34 and 2.36 and
para No. 2.37 are contradictory to each other. On the one hand, the
Ministry have a rigid land policy which envisages that no defence
land is to be declared surplus. On the other hand, according to the
Ministry, it has been decided with the approval of Raksha Mantri to
constitute a Committee at each command level to review the land
acquired by the Ministry, its utilisation and future requirement. The
Committee are very unhappy to note that no details have been
furnished as to when these orders were passed and at what level
and whether the same was reviewed in the light of latest
recommendations of the Committee. The Committee desire that this
information should be furnished to the Committee at the earliest.
This should be quoted as a precedent in all such cases for future.
                                    29

Considering the fact that unified command is being set up, the
Committee strongly feel that utilization of land, should be examined
with reference to the common requirement/use of three Services.

     69. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that this is
high time for the Ministry of Defence to change their attitude and
to have an objective analysis of the actual requirement of the defence
land for future requirement and chalk out the possibilities to
reallocate the surplus land if any, to the affected people for the use
of agricultural purposes on lease or contract basis. This will help in
curbing resentment among the people and facilitate meaningful
utilisation of the scarce commodity       i.e. land. The Committee are
learnt that there is lack of coordination between the forces in
acquiring the land for the purpose of testing a long range weapon,
with the result, they acquire land separately for testing the same
type of weapon at different places. Which as a matter of fact uproot
large number of persons/families, devoiding them from their
traditional livelihood, destroying sometimes very fertile land and
wasting huge amount of money in developing the land for testing
the weapon system. The Committee, therefore, recommend that while
acquiring the land for testing a weapon system for use of three
forces, the Ministry should make adequate assessment and synergise
their resources in such a manner so that same range could be used
by three forces. In this way a large area of this Scarce commodity
i.e. land could be saved and used for other meaningful purpose.
The Committee also recommend that for acquisition of new land,
Government must take prior approval of the Raksha Mantri.

Separate Bill on Management of Defence Land

                   Recommendation (Para No. 2.35)

    70. In this connection, the Committee had wished to reiterate their
earlier recommendation given in their 5th report on Cantonments Bill,
2003, i.e. to bring a separate law on Defence land at the earliest for
their better management.

    71. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:

    “A separate draft Bill on ‘Defence Estates’ is under finalisation.”

    72. The Committee in their 5th Report on the Cantonments Bill
2003 presented to Parliament on 10.05.2005 had recommended for a
separate law on defence land at the earliest for their better
management. The Committee are pained to note that even after lapse
                                    30

of two years after the presentation of the said report, a separate
draft bill on Defence Management is still under finalisation.
Therefore, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and
desire the Ministry must lay down time frame to finalise the said
Bill and get the same enacted at the earliest. In case of failure to do
so in a time-bound manner, Ministry of Defence should be held
responsible.

Rehabilitation Package to the Naval Alternate OP Base Project,
District Vizag, Andhra Pradesh

              Recommendation (Para Nos. 3.8 and 3.9)

    73. The Committee were happy to note that Ministry of Defence
had offered lucrative rehabilitation package of Rs. 10 crore to the
affected families whose land had been acquired by Navy at District
Vizag for creating alternative and additional facilities in Visakhapatnam.
This was the only project where RR Package had been sanctioned but
did not come in the ambit of NPRR. The implementation and
monitoring was being done by the State Government.

    74. The Committee had strongly recommended that Ministry of
Defence in active coordination with the State Government should ensure
that benefits of rehabilitation package offered by the Ministry of Defence
reach the targeted families in a time bound manner. The Committee
also desired that Panchayat Samitis and Local Panchayat might also
be involved for proper and efficacious monitoring of the progress of
rehabilitation work being performed by the executing authority. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made by the
Government from time to time in this regard.

    75. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have
stated:

    “Para 7.1.2 of the NPRR -2003 provides for the following
    committee:—

    The Resettlement and Rehabilitation Committee constituted shall
    inter-alia include as one of its members:

       (i) a representative of women residing in the affected zone;
      (ii) a representative each of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
           Tribes residing in the affected zone;
     (iii) a representative of a voluntary organization;
                                    31

     (iv) a representative of the lead Bank;
      (v) Chairman or his nominee of the PRIs located in the affected
          zone.
     (vi) MPs/MLAs of the area included in the affected zone.

    It can, therefore, be seen that recommendations of the Parliamentary
    Standing Committee have already been given effect to.”

    76. The Committee note that the resettlement and rehabilitation
Committee has been constituted as per the provisions of NPRR –
2003. However, the Committee note that the Ministry of Defence
have not replied on the issue of compliance with the
recommendations of the Committee to ensure that the benefits of
rehabilitation package reach the targeted families in a time-bound
manner. Therefore, the Committee desire that they may be apprised
of the progress made by the Government in this regard.

Rehabilitation package to the project affected families at Rajgir,
Nalanda, Bihar

              Recommendation (Para Nos. 3.14 & 3.15)

     77. The Committee had noted that Government of India acquired
that total land measuring 2534 acres in 7 villages in Rajgir, Bihar for
propellant factory project for production of bio-modular charge system.
After possession of land, compensation/rehabilitation package was
offered to the affected families. Under this package DRDO had
constructed 1110 houses for the project affected families. The Committee
were however concerned to note that sanitation, external electrification
etc. were yet to be done by the Government of Bihar. The Committee
further noted with concern that construction work of rehabilitation
which was the joint responsibility of Ordnance Factory Board and
Government of Bihar and was expected to be completed by December
2005, had not been completed so far. Construction of Health Centre,
temples, community centres, park, school was yet to commence. Further,
electricity work and sinking of 36 number of tube wells had not been
completed.

     78. The Committee had, therefore, strongly recommended that
rehabilitation package offered to the affected families must be suitable
to them and it should be completed in a time bound manner, without
further delay, so that affected families might not be deprived of their
legitimate right to live in a dignified manner. The Committee hoped
that there would not be any time and cost overrun in implementation
                                   32

of rehabilitation package. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the progress made by the Government in this regard.

    79. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:

    “Govt. of Bihar was to arrange for rehabilitation package for the
    Land Displaced Persons (LDPs) of the village Rajgir. An amount
    of Rs. 9.46 crore based on the estimate made by PWD, Govt. of
    Bihar was placed at the disposal of the State Govt. on 22.11.2002.
    Later on Govt. of Bihar expressed its inability to undertake the
    said work. Thus the work of construction of dwelling units together
    with other infrastructure (land grading, road construction and
    provision of drinking water) was entrusted to DRDO in Nov. 2003.
    However, provision of sanitation and electricity for dwelling units
    was kept outside the scope of work of DRDO and was to be the
    responsibility of Govt. of Bihar. Accordingly, DRDO completed the
    construction of 1190 Nos. of dwelling units together with other
    infrastructures like roads and arrangements for drinking water. A
    total of 75 Nos. of Hand Pumps have been sunk at the
    rehabilitation site. Bihar Govt. vide letter dated 7.8.2006 has
    instructed DM, Nalanda to arrange sanitation/electrification work.

    2. State Government has so far issued allotment letters to 1031
    LDPs, out of which 900 LDPs have already shifted to the dwelling
    units allotted to them. State Govt. yet to allot 159 dwelling units
    to the balance LDPs. A few works like construction of Health
    Centre, temple shifting, community centre, school are yet to be
    completed. However, a school is housed in a block of dwelling
    units. For the above mentioned pending work, DRDO has
    submitted a revised estimate. The estimate needed to be revised
    because of change in design parameters for dwelling units, roads
    etc. as well as due to inflation effect from 2002 to 2006.”

    80. The Committee are constrained to note that the construction
work of rehabilitation of seven villages in Rajgir, Nalanda (Bihar)
which was expected to be completed by December 2005, has not
been completed so far. The Committee fail to understand as to why
the Ministry of Defence have again entrusted the task to provide
sanitation and external electrification to the State Government of
Bihar, when the State Government had already expressed its inability
to undertake the said work. The Committee completely disapprove
the shedding of responsibilities on the part of the Ministry of
Defence to the State Government as a result affected families are
deprived of the basic amenities i.e. sanitation and electrification and
                                    33

the people who have sacrificed everything for the cause of the nation
are forced to live in a deplorable condition.

   Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of
Defence being the consumer of land, should take moral responsibility
and monitor the implementation of rehabilitation of the project and
ensure that it should be completed in a time-bound manner.

Rehabilitation package to the project affected families at District
Averi, Himachal Pradesh

              Recommendation (Para Nos. 3.19 & 3.20)

     81. The Committee had noted that the Ministry of Defence acquired
the land in Himachal Pradesh for establishing Army Project at District
Averi. The Government of India sanctioned the Project on 2 July 1991.
The Committee were concerned to note that out of 149 oustees,
68 were rehabilitated, 34 were not entitled as they had got
compensation more than Rs. 5 lacs each and 47 were not given benefits
of rehabilitation as they did not apply within time given to them and
as a result no plots were allotted to them. Further, the Committee
were concerned to note that landless agricultural labourers, forest
dwellers, artisans were not provided with any benefits of Rehabilitation
package.

    82. The Committee did not approve the manner, in which the
Ministry of Defence was handling the rehabilitation of the displaced
families and strongly recommended that Ministry of Defence should
take up the matter at highest level with the Government of Himachal
Pradesh for extending all rehabilitation benefits to even those 47 persons
who did not apply for rehabilitation benefits within time and also to
landless agricultural labourers, artisans, forest dwellers, etc. within six
months of the presentation of this Report. The Committee desired that
deprived/affected families should be provided compensation with
interest for callous and inhuman approach of Government towards
their rehabilitation. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
progress made by the Government in this regard.

    83. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:

    “In this connection it is mentioned that Principal Director, Defence
    Estates, Western Command, Chandigarh has already taken up the
    matter with the Chief Secretary, Govt. of Himachal Pradesh, Shimla
    suggesting to take suitable action for extending Rehabilitation
    benefits to 47 oustees who did not apply within the prescribed
    time limits. He has been directed to continue to pursue it with
    Himachal Pradesh Govt.”
                                    34

    84. The Committee note that the Principal Director, Defence
Estate, Western Command has taken up the matter ‘for extending
rehabilitation benefits to those forty seven persons who did not
apply for rehabilitation benefits within time’, with the Chief
Secretary, Government of Himachal Pradesh to take suitable action
within the prescribed time limit and he has been directed to continue
to pursue this matter. The Committee desire that the Ministry should
ensure that the deprived/affected families must be provided the
rehabilitation benefits with admissible retrospective effect. The
Committee may be apprised of the progress made by the Government
in this regard.

Rehabilitation package to the project affected families of four villages
of District Nasik, Maharashtra

                   Recommendation (Para No. 3.51)

     85. The Committee had noted that Government requisitioned land
of the four villages i.e. Ambad Budruk, Dadhegaon, Nandur Bahulla,
Aswali Bahula, Taluk and District Nasik in 1943 and these were
subsequently acquired during 1950-52 for Artillery Ranges Deolali. The
Committee further noted that people had been given the cost of the
land only and they had not been provided rehabilitation package, basic
amenities, on account of difficulty to identify them. The Committee
desired that Government should conduct a survey to identify the
displaced families and extend all possible benefits of rehabilitation in
terms of allotment of plot in new villages, civic amenities, training for
self-employment as a group in the form of special rehabilitation
package.

    86. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:

    “It is not felt practical to conduct survey after 54 years in respect
    of land owners whose lands were acquired in four villages, of
    Nandur Bahula, Aaswali Bahula, Ambad Budruk and Dadhegaon
    in District Nasik in 1950-52. The land owners have settled
    somewhere else and it would be difficult to trace them out. Further,
    any effort to re-settle them again would dislocate them from their
    existing places”.

    87. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the
Ministry on sensitive issue of rehabilitation and resettlement. The
Committee feel that the Ministry are not serious enough towards
the conditions of displaced persons of the four villages of district
Nasik, Maharashtra, who were displaced in the year 1950–52 due to
                                     35

acquisition of land for Artillery Ranges Deolali. The Committee are
of the view that in order to overcome the difficulties in identifying
the affected persons after so many years, the Ministry should use
advanced Information Technology to locate them and monetary
benefits as per prevailing market rates of the land should be
provided.

Rehabilitation package to the project affected families of District
Bolangir, Orissa

        Recommendation (Para Nos. 3.61, 3.62, 3.63 and 3.64)

Recommendation (Para No. 3.61)

     88. The Committee had noted that rehabilitation package proposed
to the affected families in Bolangir Project at Orissa, though good on
paper, had not been implemented in letter and spirit. The Committee
were pained to note that even after lapse of more than 20 years of the
sanction of the project, rehabilitation of the affected, illiterate and poor
families had not been done by the Ministry of Defence and State
Government and they were living in a miserable condition. The affected
poor families were not informed of the quantum of compensation paid
to them and had been deprived of the basic facilities namely education,
health, drinking water, jobs etc. More surprising fact was that State
Government did not have any Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy
for the affected families, whose land had been acquired.

    89. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:

    “A package was finalized to rehabilitate 1030 nos. of families
    displaced from their land for setting up Ordnance Factory, Badmal.
    The package included the following:-

       (i) Provision of free land for residential accommodation with
           house building assistance @ Rs.4000/- per family for
           construction of house.
      (ii) Construction of 10 colonies with 3 Tube Wells, 1 Primary
           School, 1 Community Centre, 1 Tank and village road per
           colony.
     (iii) Construction of 1 High School, 1 ME School and 1 Health
           sub-centre including staff quarters for covering all the
           10 colonies.

    2. The Govt. of Orissa, which was responsible for peripheral
development and rehabilitation of land displaced persons, has
confirmed completion of rehabilitation package in full.”
                                    36

                   Recommendation (Para No. 3.62)

     90. As regards, the employment guarantee to the land displaced
persons, the Committee were further pained to note that out of
1030 land displaced persons, 36 have still not been provided jobs so
far despite the then Prime Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi’s assurance on
29 October, 1984 in this regard.

    91. The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated:

    “It is submitted that employment has been provided to 995 Nos.
    of personnel, one each from 995 land displaced families out of
    1030. The status on the balance 35 Nos. of cases is as under.

    Cases with no documentary evidence.                   - 22 cases

    Adoption cases.                                       - 07 cases

    Cases referred to OFB for Gp.”C”post.                 - 01 case

    Cases having no claimant.                             - 04 cases

    Court case.                                           - 01 case

    However efforts are being made to closely interact with District
    Administration for providing employment to balance 35 families
    also”.

                   Recommendation (Para No. 3.63)

     92. As regards, the monitoring of rehabilitation progress, the
Committee hold the view that the State Government of Orissa as well
as the Ordnance Factory Management were responsible for not sorting
out the grievances of the land displaced families. Even the General
Manager, Ordnance Factory had never attended any sitting of the
Monitoring Committee.

    93. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:

    “Regarding lack of support from Ordnance Factory Bolangir and it
    being responsible for not sorting out the grievances of land
    displaced families, it is stated that as and when the Monitoring
    Committee Meeting has been called by the District Administration,
    the same has been attended by the Senior Officers of the Factory.
    The Co-ordination and Monitoring Meeting is held under the
    Chairmanship of District Magistrate and the sole responsibility of
    calling and holding such Meeting is that of DM”.
                                    37

                   Recommendation (Para No. 3.64)

     94. The Committee had, therefore, concluded that in Bolangir
Rehabilitation Project, neither the Centre nor State Government was
serious to rehabilitate the affected families, with the result that the
poor persons were being deprived of their rights and forced to live in
deplorable condition without the basic facilities like education, health,
drinking water and employment. The Committee had, therefore,
strongly recommended that Government must set up a high level
Committee to look into all the Resettlement and Rehabilitation works
being executed in the Bolangir District for the project affected families.
The Committee also desired that Ministry must ensure that sitting of
the Monitoring Committee be held regularly as per the schedule and
its officers should attend it scrupulously irrespective of their ranks
and their designations and the matter of not attending the Monitoring
Committee Meeting by the General Manager, Ordnance Factory be
taken up at the highest level in order to give relief and extend possible
rehabilitation facilities to the poor land displaced families. The
Committee earnestly desired that Ministry of Defence, Command
Officers of Army and the State Government officials must cooperate
with the land displaced families and treat them sympathetically.

    95. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:

    “As stated in reply to para 3.61, District Administration, Bolangir
    has confirmed completion of the entire rehabilitation project to
    provide the basic necessary infrastructure to land displaced families.
    Thus, there seems to be no need for setting up of any Committee
    in this regard”.

    96. The Committee do not approve the evasive replies of the
Government that there seems to be no need for setting up of any
committee to look into all the Resettlement and Rehabilitation work
being executed in the Bolangir District for the project affected
families as the District Administration, Bolangir has confirmed the
completion of the entire rehabilitation project. The Committee are
surprised to note that for residential accommodation with house
building advance of only Rs. 4000/- per family for construction of
house has been included in the rehabilitation package. The
Committee fail to understand how with this meagre amount of
Rs. 4000/-, construction of the house can be completed? The more
astonished fact is that the District Administration, Bolangir has
confirmed completion of the entire rehabilitation project. The
Committee learned that the displaced families, who appeared before
                                    38

the Committee are still suffering without having basic facilities like
education, health, drinking water and employment. This is a reason
of resentment among the people. Therefore, the Committee while
reiterating their earlier recommendations wish to stress upon that
the Ministry of Defence and State Government should jointly look
into the matter at the earliest and extend rehabilitation grants to the
displaced persons.

Land Acquisition in Tamil Nadu by Naval Authority

       Recommendations (Para Nos. 3.75, 3.76, 3.85 and 3.86)

    97. The Committee had noted that there were a number of land
acquisition cases pending for enhanced compensation and non-payment
in various courts of Tamil Nadu for more than 20 years. The Committee
had further noted that State Government had not initiated efforts for
reconciliation with the affected families.

     98. The Committee in order to reduce growing litigation on
acquisition of land and non-payment of enhanced compensation
recommend that Naval Authorities and District Collectors should make
sincere efforts for reconciliation to settle the matter out of court. For
this purpose, all concerned authorities should sit together and work
out better packages for the affected families within six months in view
of the sufferings of the affected families. The Committee had stressed
that Government should follow a humanitarian approach towards the
affected families as they had lost their land and livelihood.

     99. The Committee were pained to note that displaced families
relating to the Air Force Station, Tanjore were not given rehabilitation,
as the Government of Tamil Nadu did not demand any Rehabilitation
Package from the Ministry. Further, the State Government preferred
appeal against the enhanced compensation award declared by the lower
court in favour of the displaced families. The Committee took a strong
objection to the way of working and approach of the Ministry of
Defence and State Government in handling the case of paying
compensation and extending Rehabilitation Package to the displaced
families. The Committee were not inclined to accept the reasons
forwarded by the Ministry that rehabilitation package was not offered
to the displaced families as the State Government did not demand it.
It showed that the Ministry of Defence, somehow, want to escape
from their responsibility to rehabilitate the displaced families. The
Committee had strongly recommended that the Ministry of Defence
and State Government should change their mind set and compensate
                                   39

all the aggrieved families because it was the social and legal
responsibility of the Government in a democratic country like India.

     100. The Committee, keeping in view the deplorable situation of
the displaced families at Tanjore, strongly recommended that the
Ministry of Defence should immediately offer a better rehabilitation
package to the affected families, whose land had been acquired by the
Government without rehabilitation package. The Committee also
recommended that the Ministry of Defence and representatives of the
State Government, instead of preferring appeal against the enhanced
award declared by the Court, should come forward for negotiation/
reconciliation with the displaced families with a good offer of
compensation. The Committee stressed that the Government should
follow a humanitarian approach towards the affected families, as they
had lost their land and livelihood for the noble cause of the nation.

   101.The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:

   “The Committee has suggested that all concerned authorities should
   sit together and work out better package for the affected families
   in the matter of land acquired in Tamil Nadu for the Indian Navy
   and Indian Air Force. The Committee has not appreciated the
   response of the Ministry of Defence that no demand for
   Rehabilitation package was made by the State Govt.

   2. It may be stated here that acquisition of land for public
   purposes is made under Land Acquisition Act, 1894. The State
   Govt. performs the functions of the appropriate Govt. and Distt.
   Collector or any other authority authorised by State Govt. as
   competent authority on authorisation of the Central Govt. under
   the provisions of Article 258 of the Constitution. All executive
   actions in respect of acquisition are, therefore, taken by the State
   Govt. and Acquiring Deptt. does not have effective role in the
   matter except that compensation awarded as per the provisions of
   the LA Act has to be paid. The Compensation is assessed by the
   Land Acquisition Collector or on reference/appeal by the Appellate
   Courts.

   3. Considering the hardship involved in displacement of land
   owners, the Govt. has introduced certain features by virtue of 1984
   amendment in that additional compensation @ 12% p.a. from the
   date of section 4(1) notification till the date of award/possession,
   solatium @ 30% and interest @ 9% for the first year and @ 15%
   for the subsequent years from the date of possession till actual
                                     40

    payment as per the award/decree. There is no specific provision
    in the LA Act, for Rehabilitation Package though solatium is paid
    to dilute the impact of the hardship caused due to acquisition.

    4. While the Committee’s suggestions to extend better
    rehabilitation package is well intentioned as dispossession of
    farmers from their land and dwelling causes immense hardship,
    the Govt. has expressed its intent to alleviate the hardship by
    framing NPRR-2003 (Now revised NPR-2006 is under active
    consideration). Giving retrospective effect to the Rehabilitation
    package may create immense administrative and financial problems
    to the Govt. considering the large number of acquisition cases
    finalised in the country for defence purposes. State Govts. may,
    however, in their discretion extend all possible assistance in
    deserving cases.

    5. In view of the above it is mentioned that in the past acquisition
    cases it is not possible to apply any general policy of rehabilitation.
    However, for projects for acquisition sanctioned after January 2004,
    NPRR-2003 is being applied”.

    As regard responsibility for delay execution of Rehabilitation and
resettlement Policy and number of cases which are pending in Lok
Adalat, representative of the Ministry of Defence stated:—

    “DGD and MOD’s C&W Division are both responsible. They are
    both monitoring this issue. We have separately got Lok Adalat
    figures. In the Lok Adalats, there are cases which are settled. Sir,
    42 cases so far have been settled. It is a small figure compared to
    the total number, that is what it is right bow. It is monitored both
    at the DGD level and at the Cantonments and Works Division of
    the Ministry.”

    102. The Committee note with concern that the Ministry are not
inclined to provide a better package to the project affected people
on the plea that giving retrospective effect to NPRR-2003 may create
immense administrative and financial problem to the Government.
All executive action in respect of acquisition are taken by the State
Government and the acquiring Department does not have effective
role in the matter except to pay compensation as per the demand of
the State Government. The Committee desire that the Ministry of
Defence should take up the matter at highest level with the State
Government of Tamil Nadu to impress upon to adopt a liberal
rehabilitation package in order to extend benefits to the project
                                  41

affected families. They strongly recommend that the Ministry of
Defence and State Government should follow flexible approach and
compensate and provide job to all the project affected aggrieved
families of Tanjore, Tamil Nadu by adopting a liberal rehabilitation
package, because it is the social and legal responsibility of a
democratic country like India to improve the deplorable situation of
the displaced families.

    103. The Committee desire that Ministry of Defence should
impart training and other facilities to the youth at the cost to be
borne by the Ministry itself. The Committee further desire that every
youth above the age of 18 years should be imparted skilled job
training as per his qualifications and capability.
                               CHAPTER II

   RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
           ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT

                    Recommendation (Para No. 1.12)

     The Committee take a serious note that the Project Authorities        i.e.
the Ministry of Defence/Army Authorities do not attend the Monitoring
Committees headed by the District Collector to discuss the progress of
rehabilitation and sort out the grievances of the displaced families due
to the problem of protocol. Therefore, the Committee strongly desire
that the Ministry of Defence must ensure that the above authorities
attend the monitoring meetings, irrespective of their rank or designation
to facilitate the Collector/District Magistrate to take a judicious decision
for the betterment of the affected persons.

                        Reply of the Government

     Necessary directions have been issued to all Principal Directors/
Directors, Defence Estates of the Commands, inter-alia to direct DEOs
to maintain close liaison with the Collector and attend all the
Monitoring meetings convened by District Collector to sort out the
grievances of displaced families, wherever in an acquisition project
rehabilitation grant has been given to District Collector.

                    Recommendation (Para No. 1.14)

     The Committee also note that a large number of cases regarding
payment of compensation are pending in various courts. Therefore,
the Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence should try to settle
these cases out of court through negotiations and reconciliations.

                        Reply of the Government

     The matter regarding settlement of cases through Lok Adalat can
be considered on case by case basis wherever feasible.

                      Comments of the Committee

    (Please see Para Nos. 52 to 54 of Chapter-I)

                                      42
                                   43

                   Recommendation (Para No. 2.14)

     From the above Section, the Committee note that there is no
provision for joint measurement of land by District Collector and Project
Authorities and representatives of affected families. During their study
visits to some States, the Committee observed that the system of joint
measurement varies from State to State. In Bikaner (Rajasthan) there
was no system of joint measurement, while in Pune, the Maharashtra
Government follows the system of joint measurement and pay the
measurement charges. The Committee feel that without joint
measurement the land of the affected people cannot be correctly
measured.

     The District Collector, while measuring the land, generally measures
the undisputed land and leaves aside the title disputed land, as a
result of which the disputes and court cases are increasing and the
large amount of compensation money given to the State Government
is lying unspent with the District Collector.

     Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the provisions
of joint measurement should be clearly specified under section 8 of
land Acquisition Act. In the joint measurement, besides the District
Collector, a representative of Ministry of Defence/Defence Estates
Officer and affected persons should be made the participants. The
Committee feel that this will not only pave the way for to correct
measurement of land, but also ease the likely disputes and lessen the
burden of the courts. Above all, this will facilitate in paying actual
compensation to the affected persons in time. The Committee desire
that the Ministry of Defence should consider this seriously and take
up the matter with the State Governments.

                      Reply of the Government

     Instructions have been issued to the Principal Directors/Directors,
Defence Estates of the Commands that DEOs must associate themselves
in the joint measurement to be conducted under section 8 of the Land
Acquisition Act. The cost of such joint measurement will be debited to
the project cost. Ministry of Rural Development has also been requested
to take necessary action on the above recommendation of the
Committee for amendment of Section 8 of the Act.

                   Recommendation (Para No. 2.18)

   The Committee note that land was acquired by the Ministry of
Defence in Gurdaspur District of Punjab under urgency clause and
                                    44

compensation for the same was paid to the displaced families. The
Ministry of Defence later found that the above land was not required
and decided to withdraw the acquisition. This shows failure of the
Ministry of Defence to anticipate and plan as per the requirement of
the project envisaged. The Committee strongly recommend that Ministry
of Defence should apply urgency clause only in rare cases and before
that it should plan its schemes prudently.

     The Committee are given to understand that the Ministry/Defence
Services is now following harsh methods for recovery of amount paid
to the land owners. While taking strong objection to it, the Committee
wish to point out that it has been a loss for the farmers and displaced
families as due to acquisition, they could not cultivate their land and
surrendered it for the cause of the nation.

    The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Defence
to make recoveries in easy instalments after taking into account the
losses suffered by farmers who could not cultivate their land due to
hasty acquisition by Ministry of Defence.”

                      Reply of the Government

     In regard to the recovery of money, several persons had filed a
CWP in Hon’ble High Court of Punjab & Haryana. The Hon’ble High
Court vide its judgement dated 19.12.2003 had given the following
reliefs:—

    So far as the interest amount is concerned, we feel that the
    petitioners should pay the same within a period of two years in
    instalments spread over a period of three months each. Let the
    remaining amount payable by petitioners be calculated by the
    respondent-State and the petitioners be informed about the same
    within a week. It is thereafter that out of total amount payable by
    the petitioners, the same shall be paid within a period of two
    years in three monthly equated instalments. In case of default in
    two consecutive instalments, the State Government would have
    the right to recover the entire amount in any manner it deems
    appropriate inclusive of arrears of land revenue. The first instalment
    would be payable on 1.4.2004.

    It is also mentioned that the farmers/residents of village Karoli
    from whom recovery is to be affected, have not been displaced at
    all and they were cultivating the land where they were. Therefore,
    it can be seen that relief for recovery of money has already been
    provided to the farmers.
                                   45

                   Recommendation (Para No. 2.38)

      The Committee observe that the Ministry of Defence acquire land
for temporary use of Defence Forces such as training, mobilization of
forces and day to day operational purpose. As a result the land owners
have to loose their standing crops and other properties. Therefore, the
Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence should ensure that the
affected people must get due compensation for their standing crops
and other properties.

                      Reply of the Government

    As to compensating land owners for standing crops and other
property, it is mentioned that detailed instructions in this regard have
already been issued vide Ministry of Defence letter No. 11026/1/2002/
D(Lands) dated 18.3.2002. A copy of this letter is enclosed as
Annexure.

                   Recommendation (Para No. 2.53)

     The Committee note with concern that about 15650 cases are
pending in lower courts, High Court and Supreme Court regarding
compensation paid to the persons whose land was acquired by the
Government for Defence purposes. The Committee are surprised to
note that in most of the old cases where acquisition has been completed
and even after the people accepted the compensation and land has
been taken over, still litigation is going on. The Committee are
concerned to note that significant number of cases relating to
compensation have been pending in the Courts for a long time, due
to dispute in ownership or appeal preferred by the State Government
against the enhanced compensation awarded by the lower court. The
Committee understand that in rural areas many persons live in a joint
family and occupy a piece of ancestral land without having a legal
document in their favour. Such a property is invariably declared by
the acquiring authority as a disputed property and compensation is
either not paid or withheld. Therefore, the Committee are of the view
that for identification of owner of such property, Government should
apply the law of limitation and take note of genuine possession of
land, views of the local panchayat and Gazetted Officer of that local
area. The Committee also feel that Law Officer of the Central
Government may be posted as designated office of the Defence Estate
to give timely advise regarding processing of litigations arising out of
land acquisition. The Ministry of Law has to play pro-active role in
this regard. Looking to the past experience, it may be seen that most
                                   46

of the cases are relating to award of land compensation have been
decided in favour of the displaced persons. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that Government should follow a flexible and
logical policy in such matters to pay the compensation, and the State
Government instead of filing appeal against the enhanced award of
reference court, should come forward for reconciliation/negotiation to
settle the dispute finally outside the Court.

                      Reply of the Government

     Ministry of Law and Justice has already been requested to post a
Law Officer in the Office of DGDE to give advice for processing of
litigation arising out of land acquisition.

    2. As regards settling the matter through reconciliation and
negotiation, it is mentioned that Government may resort to settling
the cases through Lok Adalats on case by case basis, wherever feasible.

                     Comments of the Committee

    (Please see Para Nos. 52 to 54 of Chapter-I)

                   Recommendation (Para No. 2.54)

    The Committee are deeply concerned over the delay in awarding
enhanced land compensation to the owners whose land has been
acquired by the Government. The Committee would like to quote a
case Law of Union of India Vs. Munshi Ram (Dead) by LRS & Others,
where writ petition filed by the Union of India challenging
redetermination order alleging that redetermination of compensation
payable must be on the basis of the decree as modified and not on
the basis of the decree as originally passed by the reference court. The
Court inter alia held that we hold that under Section 28A of the Land
Acquisition Act, the compensation payable to the applicants is the
same which is finally payable to those claimants who sought reference
under Section 18 of the Act. In case of reduction of compensation by
superior courts, the applicants under Section 28A may be directed to
refund the excess amount received by them in the light of reduced
compensation finally awarded.

    In the facts and circumstances of the case, these appeals are allowed
and a direction is made to the Collector under the Act to redetermine
the compensation payable to the respondents in accordance with the
compensation awarded by the judgement and decree of this court dated
29th April, 1997 and pay the same to the claimants within a period of
three months from today.
                                    47

    The Committee in view of the above decision of the Court desire
the Ministry of Defence to take up the matter with the State
Government in order to implement decree of the Hon’ble Court to
confer the benefits of enhanced compensation even to those who did
not seek a reference under Section 18 of the Land Acquisition Act,
1894. The Committee also desire that above ruling should be made
applicable for all the land acquisition cases pertaining to the Ministry
of Defence.

                       Reply of the Government

    There has not been any delay in payment of compensation to the
displaced persons in the subject case. In the subject land acquisition
case, involving land measuring 3569 Kanals 16 Marlas of land at village
Malyar, Tehsil and Distt. Hissar, the land was acquired under urgency
clause of the LA Act, 1894. Land was taken over in 1985 after making
80% on account of compensation in 1985 and the remaining amount,
as per the award of the Collector, was paid to the ex-land owners in
1986.

    2. Regarding implementation of the Hon’ble Supreme Court order,
a copy of the order has already been circulated to all the Principal
Directors for implementation.

              Recommendation (Para Nos. 3.8 and 3.9)

    The Committee are happy to note that Ministry of Defence has
offered lucrative rehabilitation package of Rs. 10 crore to the affected
families whose land has been acquired by Navy at district Vizag for
creating alternative and additional facilities in Visakhapatnam. This is
the only project where RR Package has been sanctioned but does not
come in the ambit of NPRR. The implementation and monitoring is
being done by the State Government.

    The Committee strongly recommend that Ministry of Defence in
active coordination with the State Government should ensure that
benefits of rehabilitation package offered by the Ministry of Defence
reach the targeted families in a time bound manner. The Committee
also desire that Panchayat Samitis and Local Panchayat may also be
involved for proper and efficacious monitoring of the progress of
rehabilitation work being performed by the executing authority. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made by the
Government from time to time in this regard.
                                     48

                        Reply of the Government

   Para 7.1.2 of the NPRR—2003 provides for the following
Committee:—

     The Resettlement and Rehabilitation Committee constituted shall
inter alia include as one of its members:

       (i) a representative of women residing in the affected zone;
      (ii)    a repr esentative each of the Scheduled          Castes and
             Scheduled Tribes residing in the affected zone;
     (iii) a representative of a voluntary organization;
     (iv) a representative of the lead Bank;
      (v) Chairman or his nominee of the PRIs located in the affected
          zone;
     (vi) MPs/MLAs of the area included in the affected zone.

    It can, therefore, be seen that recommendations of the Parliamentary
Standing Committee have already been given effect to.

                      Comments of the Committee

    (Please see Para 76 of Chapter–I)

               Recommendation (Para Nos. 3.19 and 3.20)

     The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence acquired the
land in Himachal Pradesh for establishing Army Project at District
Averi. The Government of India sanctioned the Project on 2 July, 1991.
The Committee are concerned to note that out of 149 oustees 68 were
rehabilitated, 34 were not entitled as they had got compensation more
than Rs. 5 lakhs each and 47 were not given benefits of rehabilitation
as they did not apply within time given to them and as a result no
plots were allotted to them. Further, the Committee are concerned to
note that landless agricultural labourers, forest dwellers, artisans were
not provided with any benefits of Rehabilitation package.

    The Committee do not approve the manner, in which the Ministry
of Defence is handling the rehabilitation of the displaced families and
strongly recommend that Ministry of Defence should take up the matter
at highest level with the Government of Himachal Pradesh for
extending all rehabilitation benefits to even those 47 persons who did
not apply for rehabilitation benefits within time and also to landless
                                    49

agricultural labourers, artisans, forest dwellers, etc. within six months
of the presentation of this Report. The Committee desire that deprived/
affected families should be provided compensation with interest for
callous and inhuman approach of Government towards their
rehabilitation. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress
made by the Government in this regard.
                       Reply of the Government
    In this connection it is mentioned that Principal Director, Defence
Estates, Western Command, Chandigarh has already taken up the
matter with the Chief Secretary, Govt. of Himachal Pradesh, Shimla
suggesting to take suitable action for extending Rehabilitation benefits
to 47 oustees who did not apply within the prescribed time limits. He
has been directed to continue to pursue it with Himachal Pradesh
Govt.
                     Comments of the Committee
    (Please see Para 84 of Chapter–I)
             Recommendation (Para Nos. 3.34 and 3.35)
    The Committee note that in spite of the fact that Government of
Karnataka has not formulated general policy of Rehabilitation and
Resettlement, the Ministry of Defence has offered appreciable
rehabilitation package for the Project Seabird to the affected families
as per the Memorandum of understanding signed between the Ministry
of Defence and State Government of Karnataka.
    The Committee during the visit to the Karwar Project, however,
found that certain basic facilities like drinking water, proper education
and employment are still to be extended to the affected families. The
affected families were not satisfied with the amount given by the
Government for construction of houses. Further, demands about age
relaxation in employment, training to young boys have not been
acceded to and fishing facilities are yet to be provided by the Ministry
of Defence. The Committee, therefore, recommend that grievances of
the affected families may be addressed by the Ministry of Defence
sympathetically to rehabilitate them properly.
                       Reply of the Government
    DC Karwar had been conducting regular meetings with not only
the Project Affected Families (PAFs) and their representatives but also
with the Station Commander/NOIC(KT) and DEO, Bangalore. One
sociologist was specially appointed by Principal Revenue Secretary,
Govt. of Karnataka (GoK) on special duties to DC, Karwar, for
providing timely feedbacks and assisting him in the rehabilitation
                                    50
programme. State Level Coordination Committee (SLCC) chaired by
Principal Revenue Secretary, GoK having wide cross-section of
representation is being held regularly and at least once in a year. All
Major decisions and monitoring of rehabilitation programmes are
undertaken during the SLCC.
    Issues pointed by the Committee during their visit to Karwar.
    1. Drinking Water.—Primarily, the water problem exists only in
TODUR Rehabilitation Colony during the summers. To resolve this
problem, DC Karwar has been given go ahead sanction to resolve it
through Chendiya if feasible, work out with Tamil Nadu Water and
Drainage Authorities      in Chennai and obtain a techno-economic
feasibility through desalination of sea water of drinking. As permanent
measure,
    2. Karnataka Water and Drainage Board (KUWS&DB) tasked to
lay a separate pipeline to augment water supply for entire Karwar.
KUWS&DB commenced the work and requisite loans for the Project
have also been obtained.
     3. Proper Education and Employment—A number of initiatives
have been undertaken by MOD to assist the PAFs in availing the job
opportunities at Navy, Project Seabird and with local trade. Tangible
among them is the ITI stipend to male members of PAFs for which
Rs. 2 crores was set aside and paid directly to the Institutes as their
cost of training. PAFs are being also given preference in the recruitment
for the Navy, subject to other things being equal. Brief on job
opportunities provided is as under:—
     (a) Enrolment in the Navy—Separate recruitment is being carried
out for regular sailors entry in domestic branches(Cooks, Steward and
Topass) for the Project Affected Families since 1988. On an average,
about eleven sailors are being recruited annually at the local recruitment
office. About 187 sailors have been recruited in the Navy till 2005.

    (b) Year-wise Enrolment of Children of PAFs in it is as under:—

    Sl.No.   Training Year                     Nos. of Students
    (a)       1998-1999                               237
    (b)       1999-2000                               237
    (c)       2000-2001                               178
    (d)       2001-2002                               175
    (e)       2002-2003                                65
    (f)       2003-2004                                55
    (g)       2004-2005                               108

              Total                                  1055
                                   51

    (c) Civilian Complement at Naval Base, Karwar.

      (i)    16 in number Class IV employees (Driver, Peon, Chowkidar,
            LDC, Safaiwala) were recruited.
      (ii) 232 Group ‘C‘ and ‘D‘ civilians personnel have been
           recruited in 2005. From the data available, about 42%
           candidates have been selected from the Project Affected
           Families, 34% from the city of Karwar, whilst 13% have
           been selected from other places within Karnataka. Only 11%
           are from States other than the State of Karnataka.
     (iii) Similarly, the PAFs are likely to get employment in the
           vacancies likely to be filled for Naval Stores Depot, Naval
           Armament Depot and Naval Ship Repair Yard in the future.
           Going by the present percentage of employment, at least
           800 more PAFs are likely to get employment.

    (d) Business—About 16 PAF‘s personnel are involved at various
stages of material supply and labour sub-contractors.

    (e) Setting up of Milk Dairy—The project report has been prepared
by BAIF and the same has been approved. The beneficiaries have
been selected and the training is expected to be completed by
Oct. 2006. The first batch of animals is expected to arrive early Nov.
2006.

     4. Inadequate Amount for Construction of Houses—It has also
been ascertained from the Revenue Deptt. of GoK and their legal offices
that financial condition of the PAF‘s at present is sound and they
have actually benefited by the rehabilitation package. PAFs today have
pucca/double storied houses in place of tiny cottages they had before
the acquisition of land. Development of Additional Infrastructure
facilities in Rehabilitation Colonies was considered after the visit of
Defence Standing Committee at Karwar. The families settled in four
rehabilitation centers Hattikeri, Belekeri, Harwarda and Todur had
demanded individual toilets. The total number comes to around 750
at a cost outlay of Rs. 3.30 crores and has been granted. The work has
started and is expected to be completed by March 2007.

    5. Age Relaxation in Employment—The age relaxation of individuals
in Central Govt. is governed by National Policy and Rules which are
neither in the purview of Ministry of Defence/Project Seabird nor
recommended in the overall interests of the nation.

     6. Training to Young Boys—State Govt. has extended the ITI scheme
for further duration of three years so as to give maximum benefit of
                                     52

training to the present generation of PAF‘s. Original ITI scheme was
till 2004-2005.

     7. Fishing Facilities—The work for construction of Fishing Harbour
is in progress under the direct supervision of DC Karwar. 550 m of
jetty has been completed and out of 108 piles, 59 piles have been
completed. Building works have also started. The survey works to
increase the depth of the channel by 1m, have been completed. There
is also a proposal to provide subsidy for purchase of 20 multi-day
Fishing vessels. The proposal has been submitted to Director, Fisheries
Department and he has been requested to take up the matter with
NCDC.

                   Recommendation (Para No. 3.52)

     The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Collector of the
Government of Maharashtra for setting up fast Track Court at the
divisional level and three Grievance Redressal Mechanism for affected
families at Aurangabad, Pune and Nagpur. The Committee hope that
this will facilitate in reducing pending cases over the years and ensure
timely benefits to the affected families. The Committee desire that State
Government instead of filing appeal against the decision of Fast Track
Court should prefer to have reconciliation with the affected families in
order to avoid long delay in litigation and to give better rehabilitation
package to them. The Committee desire that all basic amenities be
provided to the project affected families in a time bound manner
and accountability for delay in execution of Rehabilitation Project be
fixed.

                       Reply of the Government

     Ministry of Defence has requested Ministry of Law and Justice to
request High Courts of different States to set up Special Judicial Benches
in the States to decide upon the matters coming under the purview of
the Land Acquisition Act. For monitoring timely implementation of
rehabilitation programmes, Ministry of Defence has written to all State
Governments and Union Territories Administration to issue necessary
directions to all District Collectors that proper feedback on rehabilitation
programmes should be given to the concerned Defence Estates Officers.

   2. As regards settling matters through reconciliation, it is
mentioned that Government may resort to settling the cases through
Lok Adalats on case to case basis, wherever feasible.
                                    53

                   Recommendation (Para No. 3.69)

     The Committee are constrained to note that a meagre amount of
Rs. 2750 per family was given to displaced persons in Mahajan Field
Firing Range Project, Rajasthan in consultation with the State
Government. The Committee fail to understand how with such a
meagre amount the rehabilitation of displaced families will be done.
The Committee, keeping in view the better rehabilitation packages
provided by the Ministry of Defence under Project Seabird, strongly
desire that in Mahajan Field Firing Range, Rajasthan, also, the Ministry
of Defence should offer a good rehabilitation package, containing basic
facilities, namely, housing, education, health and employment to the
affected families to enable them to live life in a dignified manner. The
Committee are of the view that Ministry of Defence and the
Government of Rajasthan should make joint efforts in order to ensure
better and timely completion of rehabilitation of the displaced persons/
families. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress
made by the Ministry in this regard.

                       Reply of the Government

    Wherever displaced persons have settled, basic facilities are
available and those displaced persons who were given agricultural
land on reserve price are ploughing their land. The Collector has not
received any complaint from any displaced person that basic facilities
are not available.

    2. Ministry of Defence is of the view that there is no need to
grant special rehabilitation package due to the following facts:—

       (i) The persons of 33 villages whose land was acquired have
           not complained regarding the non availability of basic
           facilities.
      (ii) The State Govt. has provided them agricultural land at
           reserved price and developed three model villages for the
           displaced persons i.e. Ram Nagar, Krishan Nagar and
           Kumbhana Baas and School, Hospital and water, Electricity
           facilities have been provided in the newly developed     abadi
           area for these displaced persons.
     (iii) There are a number of cases in the country where lands
           have been acquired in the past for defence purposes but
           rehabilitation package has not been given. The MFFR
           acquisition case is about 20 years old. In case rehabilitation
           package is now given to the displaced persons, a survey is
           to be conducted in all acquisition cases and this will involve
           a lot of time and financial resources.
                              CHAPTER III

       RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
         COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
             VIEW OF GOVERNMENT REPLIES

                   Recommendation (Para No. 3.90)

     The Committee observe that dispute between the Ramjas Foundation
and the Army is on the issue of genuineness of agreement signed in
1942-43 under the provisions of Defence of India Act. The Committee,
therefore, desire that Ministry of Defence may examine the matter on
merit and decide accordingly. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the action taken in this regard.

                       Reply of the Government

    Two Memoranda were also received from the Lok Sabha Secretariat
pertaining to Anand Parbat Residents Association. The representationists
have mentioned that “land measuring 713.8 Bighas belonging to Ramjas
Foundation/Ramjas College Society at village Sadhora Khurd (Anand
Parvat) was acquired and possession of said land including structures
thereon was taken over by DDA in the year 1998. Some of those
structures exist on Khasra No. 1049/356 owned by Ramjas Foundation,
but now abruptly the Army has started raising claim that some
part of this Khasra falls in their jurisdiction and have declared the
residents who are residing there for the last 40 years as unauthorized
occupant.”

    2. In support of the fact that Khasra No. 1049/356 belongs to
them, the representationists have annexed a copy of the agreement
made in writing between Ramjas College Society and Governor
General in Council. As per this copy of agreement, requisition and
acquisition notices of 15.5.1945 in respect of Ramjas College Society
issued under the Defence of India Act would be treated as cancelled
with effect from 30.11.1946.

    3. The representationists, in effect, state that Khasra No. 1049/356
belongs to DDA and, therefore, any action of eviction initiated by the
Army (Ministry of Defence) under PPE Act, 1971 is illegal.
                                    54
                                      55

    4. The Facts are as follows:

   A total of 29 PPE Act notices have been issued by the Army
Authorities in the year 2005. These notices pertain to following
properties:

    Khasra No.                     Barrack No.        No. of families

    1050/356                            1                      1

    1050/356                            2                      3

    1050/356                            3                      3

    1050/356                               3K                  1

    1050/356                            4                      5

    1050/356                            5                      3

    1050/356                           14                      1

    1051/356                            7                      6

    1051/356                            8                      6

                                                              29

     Therefore, as per this table, no eviction notices have been issued
to a person who is on Khasra No. 1049/356. The dispute therefore,
now relates to whether these Barracks exist on Khasra No. 1049/356
or Khasra No. 1051/356, 1050/356.

    5. To resolve the dispute, a joint survey was conducted between
DDA, State Revenue Authorities, Army & DEO. The survey report
clearly states that barracks No. 1 to 5, 7, 8 and 14 are on survey No.
1050/456 and 1051/356. The survey was conducted under the directions
of Divisional Commissioner Delhi. The survey report was formally
signed by all the four parties on 28.1.2005.

     6. Subsequently, the Dy. Director in the DDA,        vide his letter
dated 22.11.2005 after 10 months gap, has gone back on the demarcation
and has mentioned that the demarcation carried out on 28.1.2005 is
incorrect and has requested for fresh demarcation using the modern
technology now being used by Metro Rail Transport Services. This
letter was addressed to SDM, New Delhi. The SDM, New Delhi on
27.12.2005 was conveyed the decision of competent authority rejecting
the request for fresh demarcation.
                                   56

    7. The Station HQ, Delhi has further informed that 15 of the
unauthorized occupants have filed a civil suit in the District Court
disputing the issue of notices and the court has restrained the
Defendants from dispossessing the plaintiffs from the suit premises.
The matter is now before the court as intimated by the Local Military
Authorities.

   8. As regards honouring the agreement dated 26.11.1946 between
Govt. of India and Rajmas Foundation, the following is stated:—

       (i) The copy of the agreement is not available on our records.
           However, a request has been made by the DEO to the
           representationist to show us the original agreement. We have
           not recieved any response.
      (ii) Records have been obtained from the Revenues Authorities
           and it has been confirmed that Khasra No. 1049/356 and
           few others as per Jamabandi of 1982-83 belonged to Board
           of Trust of Ramjas College Society. However, Barracks
           (including barrack No. 5) in respect of which PPE,
           Act notices have been issued are not on 1049/356 but on
           1050/356 and 1051/356.
                              CHAPTER IV

      RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
      WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
              ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE

              Recommendation (Para No. 1.7 and 1.13)

     The Committee note that Ministry of Defence has been acquiring
vast tracts of land before Independence and till date for operational
use of defence forces and other defence purposes. The land is being
acquired under age old Land Acquisition Act (LAA), 1894 and Defence
of India Act, 1939 framed during the British time and are colonial in
nature. Though these Acts have been amended from time to time,
they are totally inadequate to meet the present day needs and
aspirations of the people. This was amply brought out during oral
evidences, tendered before the Committee by representatives of Ministry
of Law, Rural Development and State Government officials. The
Committee are constrained to note that there was no policy for
rehabilitation of Displaced persons as such and only in 2004, guidelines
have been issued in the form of National Policy on Resettlement and
Rehabilitation (NPRR), 2003. In the absence of a policy for rehabilitation,
the displaced persons were being given meagre compensation for the
land acquired for defence projects and no effort was being made to
resettle and rehabilitate them properly. In view of foregoing, the
Committee strongly feel that there is an urgent need to have a
comprehensive and more democratic legislation to deal with the matter
relating to Land Acquisition,       Compensation, Resettlement and
Rehabilitation. The Ministry of Defence being the largest user of land
should take appropriate initiatives with the concerned Ministries in
this regard. The Committee further desire that the Ministry of Defence
should have their own practical and better package for resettlement
and rehabilitation till the commencement of this comprehensive
legislation.

    The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence has adopted
NPRR 2003 formulated by Ministry of Rural Development which has
not been given legislative shape by the Government and hence is not
enforceable in the court of law. Moreover, it is only applicable to the
projects having more than 500 families in the plain areas and more
than 250 families in hilly areas and therefore most of the projects of
Ministry of Defence do not come under its purview. The Committee
                                    57
                                    58

wish to recommend that the Ministry of Defence must evolve its own
rehabilitation policy which is more liberal and is applicable to all the
projects irrespective of the number of displaced families as a kind of
social responsibility of the Government.

                       Reply of the Government

      In so far as having better packages for resettlement and
rehabilitation as recommended by the Committee, it is mentioned that
National Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation for Project Affected
Families (NPRR)—2003, is already under consideration in the Ministry
of Rural Development for revision. We may await its finalisation. In
so far as the need to have comprehensive and more democratic
legislation to deal with the matters relating to Land Acquisition cases,
it is mentioned that Ministry of Rural Development, the nodal agency
for Land Acquisition Act, has already formulated draft Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Bill, 2004. The Draft LA (Amendment) Bill, 2004 has
been circulated by Ministry of Rural Development to all State
Governments and UT Governments for their comments.

                    Recommendation (Para No. 1.8)

     The Committee note that large number of people sacrifice their
ancestral land, traditional occupations and livelihoods due to acquisition
of land for various Defence purposes. Therefore, it becomes the
responsibility of the Ministry of Defence to ensure that the affected
people get fair amount of compensation and timely rehabilitation in
order to create a sense of pride and patriotic feeling in their mind that
they have sacrificed their invaluable property for the cause of the
nation.

                       Reply of the Government

     It may be mentioned that within the existing framework of Land
Acquisition Act, there is no role of acquiring Department regarding
determination of fair amount of compensation. It is determined as per
provisions prescribed in Land Acquisition Act, by the Collector/Courts.
Section 23 of the Act relates to determination of compensation. It reads
as follows:—

    “23 (1) In determining the amount of compensation to be awarded
    for land acquired under this Act, the Court shall take into
    consideration:—

    First, the market value of the land at the date of the publication
    of the notification under section 4, sub section (1);
                                    59

     Secondly, the damage sustained by the person interested, by reason
of the taking of any standing crops or trees when may be on the land
at the time of the Collector’s taking possession thereof;

     Thirdly, the damage (if any) sustained by the person interested, at
the time of the Collector’s taking possession of the land, by reason of
severing such land from his other land;

     Fourthly, the damage ( if any) sustained by the person interested,
at the time of the Collector’s taking possession of the land, by reason
of the acquisition injuriously affecting his other property, movable or
immovable, in any other manner, or his earnings;

    Fifthly, if, in consequence of the acquisition of the land by the
Collector the reasonable expenses (if any) incidental to such change;
and

    Sixthly, the damage (if any) bona fide resulting from diminution of
the profits of the land between the time of the publication of the
declaration under section 6 and the time of the Collector’s taking
possession of the land.

     “(1-A) In addition to the market value of the land, as above
provided, the Court shall in every case award an amount calculated
at the rate of twelve per centum per annum on such market value for
the period commencing on and from the date of the publication of the
notification under section 4, sub section(1), in respect of such land to
the date of the award of the Collector or the date of taking possession
of the land, whichever is earlier.

    Explanation—In computing the period referred to in this
sub section, any period or periods during which the proceedings for
the acquisition of the land were held up on account of any stay or
injunction by the order of any Court shall be excluded.

    (2) In addition to the market value of the land as above provided,
the court shall in every case award a sum of (thirty per centum) on
such market value, in consideration of compulsory nature of the
acquisition.”

    2. It may further be mentioned that Ministry of Rural Development
has proposed draft amendments to Land Acquisition Act, 1894. The
Draft Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill, 2004 has been circulated by
the Ministry of Rural Development to all State Governments and
UT Governments for their comments.
                                    60

                   Recommendation (Para No. 1.10)

    On examining various representations and oral evidences of the
displaced families who have lost their lands due to defence acquisition
over the years, the Committee note that most of them have not been
properly resettled and rehabilitated and are still suffering. The
Committee desire that Government should consider their cases
sympathetically and extend all possible assistance wherever feasible.

                       Reply of the Government

    Ministry of Defence has adopted National Policy on Resettlement
and Rehabilitation for Project Affected Families (NPRR)—2003, since
2004. This policy is being applied for all projects being considered
since then. Hence, for projects executed earlier to 2004 it is not possible
to apply this policy. However, it may be mentioned that in
certain projects even in the past, on the requests of respective
State Governments, rehabilitation grants were sympathetically
considered.

                     Comments of the Committee

    (Please see Para Nos. 36 to 39 of Chapter–I)

                   Recommendation (Para No. 1.11)

    The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence is extending
funds to the State Government for rehabilitation packages as per their
demands. The Committee desire that the Ministry must take regular
feed back from State Government on the implementation of
rehabilitation programme and in case of non-implementation and delay,
the accountability may be fixed. The Committee also desire the Ministry
to ensure that the funds given to States for the rehabilitation
programme are not misused or diverted for other projects. The
Committee have also observed that in some cases in the absence of
any demand of the State Government, the displaced persons have not
been given any rehabilitation package. Therefore, the Committee
strongly recommend that the Government should address this issue in
the right perspective to ensure that the displaced persons are rightfully
rehabilitated.

                       Reply of the Government

    Ministry of Defence has written to all State Governments and
Union Territories Administration to issue necessary directions to all
District Collectors that proper feedback regarding rehabilitation
                                     61

programme of displaced persons, whenever the land is acquired for
Ministry of Defence and where rehabilitation grants are given by
Ministry of Defence, should be given to the concerned Defence Estates
Officers. Further, it is also mentioned that National Policy on
Resettlement and Rehabilitation for Project Affected Families (NPRR)–
2003, is under revision with Ministry of Rural Development. We may
await its finalisation.

                      Comments of the Committee

    (Please see Para Nos. 42 & 43 of Chapter–I)

                    Recommendation (Para No. 2.11)

     The Committee note that as per clause 4 of Land Acquisition Act
(LAA), 1894, the Government communicate to the land owner its
intention to acquire land by publishing Gazette notification in two
Daily Newspapers circulated in that locality, of which at least one is
in regional language. Also, public notice of this notification is pasted
at convenient places in the locality where land is being acquired. The
Committee feel that this is not sufficient and desire that individual
notifications should be served to the affected persons. The Committee
are further of the view that this procedure may be convenient and
helpful in places having literate inhabitants. However, in hilly and
remote areas with low literacy people may not be aware of the
notification and the procedures and formalities that are required to be
completed for filing objections. Therefore, the Committee strongly feel
that the Government must evolve a people friendly approach and desire
that a representative of the acquiring authority, in this case     i.e. DGDE,
alongwith the District Administration          should serve individual
notifications and go to the affected people or local panchayat and
brief them regarding the intention of the Government and assist them
in completing formalities/filing their objections, if any, in writing.
Further there should be some follow-up action in this regard. The
Committee further desire that while comprehensive review of the Land
Acquisition Act is done by the Government that aspects should be
kept in mind.

                       Reply of the Government

    The Ministry of Rural Development has been requested to take
further necessary action on this recommendation of the Committee
and intimate action taken thereon to the Ministry of Defence.

                      Comments of the Committee

    (Please see Para No. 57 of Chapter–I)
                                    62

              Recommendation (Para No. 2.34 and 2.36)

    The Committee observe that acquisition of land for defence related
activities is being done keeping in view the present and future
requirements. Requirement of land is established by a Board of Officers
as per given scale of land authorization and acquisition is done based
on laid down rules and procedures. The Committee are, however, given
to understand that in some projects, like National Defence Academy
(NDA) 8,000 acres of land was acquired, out of which not more than
25 per cent, is utilized and rest has remained unutilized even after 60
years. During the study visits of the Committee to various projects,
the Committee had observed that there are large areas of defence
land, lying unutilized and they have not been given back to the
ex-landowners. In this connection, the Committee are informed that
the users have to leave certain portion of land as buffer zone and
there are certain areas needed for future expansion. Plan for using the
land is there but due to constraints of funds and other reasons the
users are not in a position to utilize the whole land. As a result, this
gives a totally misleading impression that the Defence authority is
acquiring land mindlessly.

    Since land is a scarce commodity the Committee desire that the
Ministry of Defence should set up a high level group to review the
total land acquired, actual utilization thereof and the requirement of
land in future for all Defence projects. During the review, the
Government should also see the possibilities to re- allocate the surplus
land, if any, to the affected people for the use of agricultural purposes,
on lease/contract basis. This will not only avoid resentment among
the people but also facilitate meaningful utilization of surplus land.

     The Committee observe that Technological development is taking
place very rapidly in India and world wide. It has wide effect on
different segments and way of working and requirements of the
Government. The Committee are of the view that keeping in view the
rapid development of technology Ministry of Defence must review its
decision on requirement of vast acquisition of land for Defence
purposes and its likely use.

                       Reply of the Government

    The above recommendations of the Standing Committee have been
considered in the Ministry of Defence and it has been decided with
the approval of Raksha Mantri to constitute Committees at each
Command level in the Ministry of Defence to review the land acquired
by Ministry of Defence and its utilization and actual requirement.
Necessary orders in this regard have been issued.
                                     63

                     Comments of the Committee

    (Please see Para Nos. 68 & 69 of Chapter–I)

                   Recommendation (Para No. 2.35)

     In this connection, the Committee wish to reiterate their earlier
recommendation given in their 5th report on Cantonment Bill, 2003,
i.e. to bring a separate law on Defence land at the earliest for their
better management.

                       Reply of the Government

    A separate draft Bill on ‘Defence Estates’ is under finalisation.

                     Comments of the Committee

    (Please see Para No. 72 of Chapter–I)

                   Recommendation (Para No. 2.37)

     The Committee observe that in many projects, the Ministry of
Defence is having surplus land. For carrying out developmental
activities, like widening of road of National Highways, State Highways
or the village approach road, when the concerned authorities approach
the Ministry of Defence, the request is examined at the ground level
and is turned down without sending it to the highest authority.
Therefore, the Committee strongly feel that there must be a mechanism
in the Ministry of Defence at the highest level to examine these issues
and facilitate the developmental activities without affecting the security
of the nation.

                       Reply of the Government

     The land policy of Ministry of Defence envisages that no defence
land is to be declared surplus. If any land is to be given up, it should
be on exchange of land of equal value basis. However, the demands
of the State Governments/Central Government/Undertakings etc. can
be considered on the basis of merits of each case. Generally, the requests
received from such organizations for defence land are considered in
consultation with Army Authorities and the Director General of Defence
Estates and decisions taken at appropriate levels in the Ministry.

                     Comments of the Committee

    (Please see Para Nos. 68 & 69 of Chapter–I)
                                    64

 Recommendations (Para Nos. 2.59, 2.60, 2.66, 2.73, 2.84, 2.85, 2.91,
              2.92, 2.104, 2.105, 2.106 and 2.107)

    The Committee observe that prior to 2003, there was no policy for
granting rehabilitation assistance to the persons, displaced by the
acquisition of land. In 2003, National Policy on Resettlement &
Rehabilitation (NPRR) for Project Affected Families was formulated by
the Ministry of Rural Development. This has been notified in
Government of India Gazette on 17.2.2004. The Committee, while
examining the subject, have also examined the provisions of National
Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation (NPRR), 2003. The Committee
are given to understand that this policy provides only guidelines for
the Ministries which are not enforceable in the Court of Law, unless
the same is passed by the Parliament in the form of an Act.

     The Committee are constrained to note that even after 59 years of
independence, there is no law or rule governing resettlement and
rehabilitation and the Government of India is following the age old
colonial laws for this purpose. Therefore, the Committee strongly
recommend that the Government must give a serious thought to bring
a Bill for giving a legislative shape to the Rehabilitation/Resettlement
Policy at the earliest.

     The Committee are given to understand that many Public Sector
Undertakings, Departments, Ministries and State Governments are
offering better rehabilitation        package. Even the Ministry of
Rural Development has communicated to all the Central Government
Ministries and Departments that National Policy on Resettlement and
Rehabilitation (NPRR) only specifies the minimum benchmark and they
can offer higher package. However, the Committee are constrained to
note that the Ministry of Defence are satisfied with the policy and has
adopted it as its rehabilitation policy and there is no proposal to frame
a separate, more liberal policy. The Committee deplore the callous
attitude of Ministry of Defence and strongly recommend that the
Ministry of Defence should adopt a practical and liberal approach and
frame its own policy having better packages for the betterment of
affected families which may be treated as a model packages for other
Departments/Ministries to follow.

    The Committee note that the provisions of NPRR-2003 are
applicable in the case of displacement of 500 families or more in plain
areas and 250 families or more in hilly areas. The Committee, however,
note that most of the Defence Projects do not come under the purview
of NPRR, since they do not meet the criteria mentioned in it. The
                                    65

Committee feel that the criteria given in NPRR are vague and not
practical. Therefore, the Committee wish to recommend that the
Ministry of Defence must evolve its own rehabilitation policy which
will be applicable to all the projects, irrespective of the number of
displaced families, as a kind of social responsibility of the Government.

     The Committee observe that compulsory acquisition of private lands
displaces persons from their ancestral land and property forcing them
to give up their home, assets and means of livelihood. Therefore,
displacement uproots people not just from their homes but also from
their traditional occupations and livelihood they are familiar with. The
system of extending cash compensation under the Land Acquisition
Act (LAA) and such other Acts in most cases does not enable the
affected families to obtain cultivable agricultural land, home, means of
livelihood and other resources. To address these problems, the NPRR
2003 was notified by Government of India and came into force          w.e.f.
2004. The Committee have examined the provisions of rehabilitation
and resettlement benefits and are of the view that the objectives of
NPRR are not properly reflected in the provisions. The Committee,
therefore, wish to recommend that resettlement/rehabilitation should
be location-specific, situation-specific and community-specific. In coastal
village, fishermen should be resettled in another coastal area only
because they are accustomed to continue with their traditional
occupation and to earn perpetual income therefrom. A village having
tribal population should be resettled in a homogenous area having
their own people, so that they do not feel out of place.

     The Committee further recommend that the rehabilitation site must
have skill based training, education and different types of occupational
provisions, suitable to the local community. Besides, the rehabilitation
package should provide village roads, drinking water, primary medical
facilities.

     The Committee are distressed to note that development and
implementation of rehabilitation package, including providing training,
education, employment, housing, health and sanitation is the sole
responsibility of the State Government. The Ministry of Defence just
provides the money to the State Governments as per their demand for
implementation of the rehabilitation package. The Ministry of Defence
does not have any mechanism/trained manpower to supervise the
actual implementation. The Committee strongly feel that in case of
compulsory displacement, the oustees not only lose their land and
ancestral properties but also their vocation and means of livelihood
for the cause of development of the whole nation. Therefore, our
                                    66

country, being a welfare State, must strive to provide training,
education, employment, facilities for potable water, health services and
sanitation to help the families of the oustees to re-establish economic
sustenance and the basic livelihood. The Committee further desire that
to enable the oustees to carry out their traditional job in a more
scientific way and to pursue new vocational courses, the Government
should establish ITI and other vocational institutions in the
rehabilitation sites. Besides, the Government should provide
simultaneous training facilities to the youth of displaced families as
per the job requirements of the defence projects so as to enable them
to avail employment opportunity in the said project. The Government
should consider to provide some gainful employment to the oustees.

     The Committee strongly feel that the Ministry of Defence should
share the responsibility with the State Government by appointing an
Estate Officer to coordinate and monitor the rehabilitation projects,
being executed by the State Government, for effective implementation
of rehabilitation package.

    The Committee observe that prior to 2004, the Ministry of Defence
was paying rehabilitation grants to the concerned State Governments
as per their demands. Planning, acquisition and monitoring of the
rehabilitation projects was the sole responsibility of the respective
State Government. The Ministry of Defence was not associated with
the monitoring mechanism alongwith the State Government. However,
the Defence Estate Officer used to maintain a constant liasion with the
Collectors at the field level to see the progress of land acquisition. The
Committee further observe that in many cases, the affected persons
have not been resettled and rehabilitated due to various reasons. As a
result, cases are still going on in various courts for years together.

     The Committee are distressed to note that the Ministry of Defence
was only concerned to maintain constant liaison with the State
Government authorities to see the progress of land acquisition and
not with the progress of rehabilitation and resettlement. The Ministry
of Defence left this crucial task at the mercy of the State Government.
The Committee strongly feel that the acquiring agency should not
shift the total responsibility to the State Governments. Therefore, the
Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of Defence must ask
the State Government to furnish regular feedback in time and examine
all the pending cases where people have not been given their dues or
where they have not been resettled or rehabilitated and the
accountability must be fixed. The Ministry should also involve
themselves with the State Government and solve the old cases as part
                                     67

of their social obligation. In addition, the Committee desire that a
Floor Level Committee comprising a representative of Ministry of
Defence, District Administration (Collector) and affected persons may
be constituted to oversee the effective implementation of rehabilitation
and resettlement, starting from Gazette notification to actual
rehabilitation and it should be given a legal status. The Committee
further desire that in the comprehensive legislation on land acquisition,
resettlement and rehabilitation as proposed by the Committee in their
earlier paragraph, it should be taken care of. The Ministry of Defence
should delegate powers for monitoring the rehabilitation and ensure
accountability.

     The Committee observe that, at the higher level, as per Para 7.2.1
of the National Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation, the State
Government shall constitute a Grievance Redressal Cell under the
Chairmanship of the Revenue Commissioner for Resettlement and
Rehabilitation for redressal of Grievances of the project affected families.
The aggrieved families may move a petition to this Cell for redressal
of their grievances. The form and manner in which and the time
within which the complaints may be made to the Grievance Redressal
Cell and disposed of, shall be prescribed by the State Government.

     The Committee are distressed to note that the policy is silent in
regard to form and manner in which the complaints may be made to
the Grievance Redressal Cell and the time within which it will be
disposed of. Everything has been left to the whims and caprices of the
State Government. Therefore, the Committee desire that the provision
of the policy may be thoroughly reviewed and everything should be
specified in the policy itself in order to avoid ambiguity and
misinterpretation and the Grievance Redressal Cell should include
District Collector, representative of Ministry of Defence and a
representative of the affected families.

    The Committee observe that, in the three-layer structure of
monitoring mechanism, the Ministry of Defence participates only at
the National Level. At the lower and the middle levels, the Ministry
of Defence does not have any role to play. The Committee are of the
strong view that, in order to ensure a meaningful rehabilitation, a
representative of Defence Estate Organisation should be made a
Member at all the levels of the monitoring mechanism.

                       Reply of the Government

    These recommendations relate to amending policy frame work
given in NPRR-2003. It is mentioned that there is a proposal under
                                    68

consideration with Ministry of Rural Development for formulation of
NPR-2006 by revising the NPRR-2003. We may await its formulation.

                     Comments of the Committee

    (Please see Para Nos. 36 to 39 of Chapter–I)

               Recommendation (Para No. 2.63 & 2.86)

    The Committee observe that there was no policy to deal with
rehabilitation and resettlement prior to 2004. Acquisition of land and
rehabilitation was the responsibility of the State Governments. The
Ministry of Defence was paying to the State Governments as per their
demand. The Ministry of Defence has adopted these guidelines to
deal with the cases from 2004 onwards and not to deal with earlier
cases. The Committee are pained to note that there are old cases
pending in the courts and in many cases people have not received
their dues and their suffering is prolonging. Keeping in mind the
large scale suffering of people and to provide justice to the common
man, who has sacrificed his ancestral property for the safety and
betterment of the nation, the Committee desire the Ministry to re-
think over this issue and take necessary approval of the competent
authority to provide a practical and liberal rehabilitation package to
the cases prior to 2004. The Committee further desire that the Ministry
should have a constant liaisoning with the State Governments to
monitor the progress of rehabilitation and actual utilization of monitory
allocation provided by them for the said purpose.

                      Reply of the Government

   For land acquisition projects prior to 2004, the NPRR-2004 is not
proposed to be applied. However, in some projects rehabilitation grants
have already been provided.

     As regards recommendations of the Committee to have constant
liaisoning with State Governments to monitor the progress of
rehabilitation and actual utilization of the money provided to them, it
is mentioned that certain provisions are being made to take care of
this in the proposed NPRR-2006.

                     Comments of the Committee

    (Please see Para Nos. 36 to 39 of Chapter–I)
                                   69

              Recommendation (Para No. 3.14 & 3.15)

     The Committee note that Government of India acquired that total
land measuring 2534 acres in 7 villages in Rajgir, Bihar for propellant
factory project for production of bio-modular charge system. After
possession of land, compensation/rehabilitation package was offered
to the affected families. Under this package DRDO has constructed
1110 houses for the project affected families. The Committee are
however concerned to note that sanitation, external electrification etc.
are yet to be done by the Government of Bihar. The Committee further
note with concern that construction work of rehabilitation which was
the joint responsibility of Ordnance Factory Board and Government of
Bihar and was expected to be completed by December 2005, has not
been completed so far. Construction of Health Centre, temples,
community centres, park, school is yet to commence. Further, electricity
work and sinking of 36 number of tube wells have not been completed.

     The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that rehabilitation
package offered to the affected families must be suitable to them and
it should be completed in a time bound manner, without further delay,
so that affected families may not be deprived of their legitimate right
to live in a dignified manner. The committee hope that there will not
be any time and cost overrun in implementation of rehabilitation
package. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress
made by the Government in this regard.

                      Reply of the Government

     Govt. of Bihar was to arrange for rehabilitation package for the
Land Displaced Persons (LDPs) of the village Rajgir. An amount of
Rs.9.46 crore based on the estimate made by PWD, Govt. of Bihar was
placed at the disposal of the State Govt. on 22.11.2002. Later on Govt.
of Bihar expressed its inability to undertake the said work. Thus the
work of construction of dwelling units together with other infrastructure
(land grading, road construction and provision of drinking water) was
entrusted to DRDO in Nov. 2003. However, provision of sanitation
and electricity for dwelling units was kept outside the scope of work
of DRDO and was to be the responsibility of Govt. of Bihar.
Accordingly, DRDO completed the construction of 1190 Nos. of dwelling
units together with other infrastructures like roads and arrangements
for drinking water. A total of 75 Nos. of Hand Pumps have been sunk
at the rehabilitation site. Bihar Govt.    vide letter dated 7.8.2006 has
instructed DM, Nalanda to arrange sanitation/electrification work.
                                    70

    State Govt. has so far issued allotment letter to 1031 LDPs, out of
which 900 LDPs have already shifted to the dwelling units allotted to
them. State Govt. yet to allot 159 dwelling units to the balance LDPs.
A few works like construction of Health Centre, temple shifting,
community centre, school are yet to be completed. However, a school
is housed in a block of dwelling units. For the above mentioned
pending work, DRDO has submitted a revised estimate. The estimate
needed to be revised because of change in design parameters for
dwelling units, roads etc. as well as due to inflation effect from 2002
to 2006.

                     Comments of the Committee

    (Please see Para No. 72 of Chapter–I)

                   Recommendation (Para No. 3.51)

     The Committee note that Government requisitioned land of the
four villages i.e. Ambad Budruk, Dadhegaon, Nandur Bahulla, Aswali
Bahula, Taluk and District Nasik in 1943 and these were subsequently
acquired during 1950-52 for Artillery Ranges Deolali. The Committee
further note that people have been given the cost of the land only and
they have not been provided rehabilitation package, basic amenities,
on account of difficulty to identify them. The Committee desire that
Government should conduct a survey to identify the displaced families
and extend all possible benefits of rehabilitation in terms of allotment
of plot in new villages, civic amenities, training for self-employment
as a group in the form of special rehabilitation package.

                       Reply of the Government

     It is not felt practical to conduct survey after 54 years in respect
of land owners whose lands were acquired in four villages, of Nandur
Bahula, Aaswali Bahula., Ambad Budruk and Dadhegaon in District
Nasik in 1950-52. The land owners have settled somewhere else and
it would be difficult to trace them out. Further, any effort to re-settle
them again would dislocate them from their existing places.

                     Comments of the Committee

    (Please see Para No. 87 of Chapter–I)

                   Recommendation (Para No. 3.61)

    The Committee note that rehabilitation package proposed to the
affected families in Bolangir Project at Orissa, though good on paper,
                                     71

has not been implemented in letter and spirit. The Committee are
pained to note that even after lapse of more than 20 years of the
sanction of the project, rehabilitation of the affected, illiterate and poor
families has not been done by the ministry of Defence and State
Government and they are living in a miserable condition. The affected
poor families were not informed of the quantum of compensation paid
to them and have been deprived of the basic facilities namely education,
health, drinking water, jobs etc. More surprising fact is that State
Government does not have any Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy
for the affected families, whose land has been acquired.

                       Reply of the Government

    A package was finalized to rehabilitate 1030 nos. of families
displaced from their land for setting up Ordnance Factory, Badmal.
The package included the followings:—

       (i) Provision of free land for residential accommodation with
           house building assistance @ Rs.4000/- per family for
           construction of house.
      (ii) Construction of 10 colonies with 3 Tube Wells, 1 Primary
           School, 1 Community Centre, 1 Tank and village road per
           colony.
     (iii) Construction of 1 High School, 1 ME School and 1 Health
           sub-centre including staff quarters for covering all the
           10 colonies.

    2. The Govt. of Orissa, which was responsible for peripheral
development and rehabilitation of land displaced persons, has
confirmed completion of rehabilitation package in full.

                      Comments of the Committee

    (Please see Para No. 96 of Chapter–I)

                    Recommendation (Para No. 3.62)

    As regards, the employment guarantee to the land displaced
persons, the Committee are further pained to note that out of 1030
land displaced persons, 36 have still not been provided jobs so far
despite the then Prime Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi’s assurance on
29 October, 1984 in this regard.
                                   72

                      Reply of the Government

    It is submitted that employment has been provided to 995 Nos. of
personnel, one each from 995 land displaced families out of 1030. The
status on the balance 35 Nos. of cases is as under:

    Cases with no documentary evidence                — 22 cases
    Adoption cases                                    — 07 cases
    Cases referred to OFB for Gp.”C” post             — 01 case
    Cases having no claimant                          — 04 cases
    Court case                                        — 01 case

  However efforts are being made to closely interact with District
Administration for providing employment to balance 35 families also.

                     Comments of the Committee

    (Please see Para No. 96 of Chapter–I)

                  Recommendation (Para No. 3.63)

    As regards, the monitoring of rehabilitation progress, the Committee
hold the view that the State Government of Orissa as well as the
Ordnance Factory Management are responsible for not sorting out the
grievances of the land displaced families. Even the General Manager,
Ordnance Factory has never attended any sitting of the Monitoring
Committee.

                      Reply of the Government

    Regarding lack of support from Ordnance Factory, Bolangir and it
being responsible for not sorting out the grievances of land displaced
families, it is stated that as and when the Monitoring Committee
Meeting has been called by the District Administration, the same has
been attended by the Senior Officers of the Factory. The Co-ordination
and Monitoring Meeting is held under the Chairmanship of District
Magistrate and the sole responsibility of calling and holding such
Meeting is that of DM.

                     Comments of the Committee

    (Please see Para No. 96 of Chapter–I)
                                     73

                   Recommendation (Para No. 3.64)

     The Committee, therefore, conclude that in Bolangir Rehabilitation
Project, neither the Center nor State Government is serious to
rehabilitate the affected families, with the result that the poor persons
are being deprived of their rights and forced to live in deplorable
condition without the basic facilities like education, health, drinking
water, and employment. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
that Government must set up a high level Committee to look into all
the Resettlement and Rehabilitation works being executed in the
Bolangir District for the project affected families. The Committee also
desire that Ministry must ensure that sitting of the Monitoring
Committee be held regularly as per the schedule and its officers should
attend it scrupulously irrespective of their ranks and their designations
and the matter of not attending the Monitoring Committee Meeting
by the General Manager, Ordnance Factory be taken up at the highest
level in order to give relief and extend possible rehabilitation facilities
to the poor land displaced families. The Committee earnestly desire
that Ministry of Defence, Command Officers of Army and the State
Government officials must cooperate with the land displaced families
and treat them sympathetically.

                       Reply of the Government

    As stated in reply to para 3.61, District Administration, Bolangir
has confirmed completion of the entire rehabilitation project to provide
the basic necessary infrastructure to land displaced families. Thus, there
seems to be no need for setting up of any Committee in this regard.

                     Comments of the Committee

    (Please see Para No. 96 of Chapter–I)

        Recommendation (Para Nos. 3.75, 3.76, 3.85 and 3.86)

    The Committee note that there are a number of land acquisition
cases pending for enhanced compensation and non-payment in various
courts of Tamil Nadu for more than 20 years. The Committee further
note that State Government has not initiated efforts for reconciliation
with the affected families.

     The Committee in order to reduce growing litigation on acquisition
of land and non-payment of enhanced compensation recommend that
Naval Authorities, and District Collectors should make sincere efforts
for reconciliation to settle the matter out of court. For this purpose, all
                                   74

concerned authorities should sit together and work out better packages
for the affected families within six months in view of the sufferings of
the affected families. The Committee stress that Government should
follow a humanitarian approach towards the affected families as they
have lost their land and livelihood.

     The Committee are pained to note that displaced families relating
to the Air force Station, Tanjore were not given rehabilitation, as the
Government of Tamil Nadu did not demand any Rehabilitation Package
from the Ministry. Further, the State Government preferred appeal
against the enhanced compensation award declared by the lower court
in favour of the displaced families. The Committee take a strong
objection to the way of working and approach of the Ministry of
Defence and State Government in handling the case of paying
compensation and extending Rehabilitation Package to the displaced
families. The Committee are not inclined to accept the reasons
forwarded by the Ministry that rehabilitation package was not offered
to the displaced families as the State Government did not demand it.
It shows that the Ministry of Defence, somehow, wants to escape from
its responsibility to rehabilitate the displaced families. The Committee
strongly recommend that the Ministry of Defence and State Government
should change their mind set and compensate all the aggrieved families
because it is the social and legal responsibility of the Government in
a democratic country like India.

    The Committee, keeping in view the deplorable situation of the
displaced families at Tanjore, strongly recommend that the Ministry of
Defence should immediately offer a better rehabilitation package to
the affected families, whose land has been acquired by the Government
without rehabilitation package. The Committee also recommend that
the Ministry of Defence and representatives of the State Government,
instead of preferring appeal against the enhanced award declared by
the Court, should come forward for negotiation/reconciliation with
the displaced families with a good offer of compensation. The
Committee stress that the Government should follow a humanitarian
approach towards the affected families, as they have lost their land
and livelihood for the noble cause of the nation.

                      Reply of the Government

     The Committee has suggested that all concerned authorities should
sit together and work out better package for the affected families in
the matter of land acquired in Tamil Nadu for the Indian Navy and
Indian Air Force. The Committee has not appreciated the response of
                                    75

the Ministry of Defence that no demand for Rehabilitation package
was made by the State Government.

    2. It may be stated here that acquisition of land for public
purposes is made under Land Acquisition Act, 1894. The State Govt.
performs the functions of the appropriate Govt. and Distt. Collector or
any other authority authorised by State Govt. as competent authority
on authorisation of the Central Govt. under the provisions of
Article 258 of the Constitution. All executive actions in respect of
acquisition are, therefore, taken by the State Govt. and Acquiring
Deptt. does not have effective role in the matter except that
compensation awarded as per the provisions of the LA Act has to be
paid. The Compensation is assessed by the Land Acquisition Collector
or on reference/appeal by the Appellate Courts.

     3. Considering the hardship involved in displacement of land
owners, the Govt. has introduced certain features by virtue of 1984
amendment in that additional compensation @ 12% p.a. from the date
of section 4(1) notification till the date of award/possession, solatium
@ 30% and interest @ 9% for the first year and @ 15% for the
subsequent years from the date of possession till actual payment as
per the award/decree. There is no specific provision in the LA Act,
for Rehabilitation Package though solatium is paid to dilute the impact
of the hardship caused due to acquisition.

    4. While the Committee’s suggestions to extend better
rehabilitation package is well intentioned as dispossession of farmers
from their land and dwelling causes immense hardship, the Govt. has
expressed its intent to alleviate the hardship by framing NPRR-2003
(Now revised NPR-2006 is under active consideration). Giving
retrospective effect to the Rehabilitation Package may create immense
administrative and financial problems to the Govt. considering the
large number of acquisition cases finalised in the country for defence
purposes. State Govts. may, however, in their discretion extend all
possible assistance in deserving cases.

    5. In view of the above it is mentioned that in the past acquisition
cases it is not possible to apply any general policy of rehabilitation.
However, for projects for acquisition sanctioned after January 2004,
NPRR-2003 is being applied.

                     Comments of the Committee

    (Please see Para No. 102 & 103 of Chapter–I)
                              CHAPTER V

 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
   FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED

                    Recommendation (Para No. 1.9)

       The Committee observe that Ministry of Rural Development is
the nodal Ministry on the subject of Land Acquisition Act and
Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy. The Committee understand that
Ministry of Rural Development is mainly responsible for rural
development; therefore, it would not be appropriate to give this task
to it. The Committee strongly feel that the Ministry of Home Affairs
should be made as a nodal Ministry for formation of laws/policies in
regard to acquisition of land, compensation, resettlement and
rehabilitation for better implementation and coordination.

                       Reply of the Government

    Ministry of Defence has requested Ministry of Rural Development
and Ministry of Home Affairs to give their comments on this
recommendation of the Committee.

                   Recommendation (Para No. 1.15)

    The Committee also desire that for speedy disposal of significant
number of pending cases for paying compensation and resettlement
and rehabilitation, Government must request the High Courts to set
up special judicial benches in each State.

                       Reply of the Government

    The Ministry of Law and Justice has been requested to request
High Courts of different States to set up Special Judicial Benches in
the States to decide upon the matters coming under the purview of
the Land Acquisition Act.

                   Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)

      The Committee are distressed to note that, till now, the
Government acquire the land and displace the people in the first
instance and allocate land to rehabilitate and resettle them at a later
stage. As a result, the people, who have sacrificed their land for the
                                    76
                                   77

cause of the nation, have to undergo manifold sufferings for years
together. Therefore, the Committee desire that the acquiring authority/
Ministry of Defence should take necessary initiatives to undertake an
advance planning for suitable rehabilitation and resettlement of the
displaced persons and convey the same to the affected people so as to
maintain transparency and gain their confidence.

                      Reply of the Government

    Ministry of Defence has adopted National Policy on Resettlement
and Rehabilitation for Project Affected         Families (NPRR)–2003,
formulated by Ministry of Rural Development, as policy document for
resettlement and rehabilitation. However, revision of the NPRR-2003
and formulation of the National Rehabilitation Policy–2006, is under
consideration of Ministry of Rural Development. The proposed
“National Rehabilitation Policy–2006” may address the issues relating
to planning the size and nature of Rehabilitation packages. We may
await its formulation.

                     Comments of the Committee

    (Please see Para Nos. 36 to 39 of Chapter–I)

                   Recommendation (Para No. 3.38)

     The Committee during the evidence were given to understand that
Ministry of Defence has acquired land more than the actual requirement
for the project executed by it and no decision has been taken so far
to return the unutilised/excess land to the farmers for their use.
Looking into the past experience that acquired defence land remained
unutilised for decades together, the Committee desire that Government
should set up a Committee to review the total land acquired by
Ministry of Defence, utilisation and actual requirement thereof and
possibility of productive use of unutilized land by the local persons/
farmers. The Committee may be apprised about the progress made by
the Government in this regard.

                      Reply of the Government

     Ministry of Defence have already issued orders for constitution of
Committee at each Command level in Ministry of Defence to review
the land acquired by Ministry of Defence and its utilization and actual
requirement.
                                   78

                    Recommendation (Para No. 3.42)

     The Committee note that at Talegaon Dabhade in the State of
Maharshtra, 190 hectares of land was notified for acquisition for defence
Project in 2002. The Committee are happy to note that in spite of
initial resistance by the local people, Ministry of Defence through
reconciliation/consent,       paid them acquisition price, and now
rehabilitation package has been proposed. The Committee are of the
firm view while rehabilitation packages are offered to the affected
families, Government must also apply provisions of Maharashtra Project
Affected Persons Rehabilitation Act, so that in addition to National
Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation 2003, other benefits may
also be extended to them. The Committee further desire that Ministry
of Defence may approve this proposal as early as possible. The
Committee hope that after approval of the proposal, Government will
execute the Project in a time bound manner. The Committee also desire
that Ministry of Defence and Government of Maharashtra must follow
flexible and humanitarian approach in handling cases of rehabilitation.

                       Reply of the Government

   Recommendations of Govt. of Maharashtra on the proposal
submitted by the Collector, Pune, are still awaited. On receipt of the
above, the same will be considered by the Ministry of Defence.




 N EW D ELHI;                             BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
12 March, 2008                                                 Chairman,
22 Phalguna, 1929   (Saka)               Standing Committee on Defence.
                                                               ANNEXURE

                     (Please see Recommendation Para 2.38 Chapter-II)

                                              No. 11026/1/2002/D (Lands)
                                                     Government of India
                                                      Ministry of Defence

                                           New Delhi, the 18th March 2002

To

       The Chief Secretaries to the
       Governments of J&K, Punjab,
       Rajasthan and Gujarat

Subject:      Ex-gratia payment of compensation to the people/farmers
              for the damages occurred to their crops etc. during the
              preparatory stage of Defence preparations in the border
              areas.
Sir,
     I am directed to say that some State Governments have approached
Ministry of Defence for payment of ex-gratia compensation to the
farmers/people for the damages occurred to their crops during the
preparatory stage of Defence preparations/movement of Armed Forces
in the broder areas. The issue has been examined and it has been seen
that in the past also the Central Govt. have granted ex-gratia
compensation to the people to cover the damages occurred to the
crops by defence preparations by the Armed Forces during preparatory
stage, in the border areas.
    2. Keeping in view the present situation in the border, the issue
has been considered in the Ministry and it has been decided to pay
ex-gratia compensation to the people/farmers for the damages occurred
to their crops etc. during the preparatory stage of defensive
preparations/movement of Armed Forces in Border areas of the States
of J&K, Punjab, Rajasthan and Gujarat. The compensation under the
scheme will cover damages of the following types:
         (a) Damages to standing crops.
         (b) Damages to standing fruit trees, orchards etc.
         (c) Damages to crops, fruit trees, orchards etc. around airfields
             and other vital installations damaged or destroyed by
             Defence preparations; and

                                      79
                                      80
         (d) Damages to fences, sheds, structures connected with
             agricutlrue and other agricultural properties.
         (e) Where cultivators are prevented from sowing new crops
             and where the land has been taken over and occupied by
             Army authorities or where such lands are mined and also
             where the land is not under the physical occupation of the
             Army but where the land owners are not allowed to
             cultivate their lands for security reasons for a period beyond
             30 days, the occupation of land would be regularised as
             per para 8 below.

    3. The compensation payable should be assessed by the local
revenue authorities in association with the representatives of Directorate
General of Defence Estates Organisation and Local Military Authorities.
The Board of Officers for the purpose would be convened by the local
Military Authorities. The compensation so assessed would be approved/
accepted by the GOC-in-C/Corps Commander. The compensation
payable, as assessed, will be projected by the DEO to the concerned
authorities for necessary sanctions.

    4. In the event of inaccessibility of operational area to the Board
of Officers due to security reasons, particularly to the reps of the
Revenue Authorities and the DEO, a certificate as per format given
below would be necessary as part of the Board proceedings to enable
sanction and release of ex-gratia payment.

Certificate by Brigade Commander

    It is certified that the land identified as ……………… was occupied
by troops from ……………… to ……………… and no civilian was
allowed to enter this area because of security reasons.

    5. The Officers of Directorate General of Defence Estates
Organisation would be competent to convey the approval for payment
of compensation so assessed by the local revenue authorities and
accepted by the GOC-in C/Corps Commander as per details given
below:

Sl.No.          Name of Officer                        Monitary limit

1.       Principal Directors/Directors,            Rs. 5 lakhs per case
         Defence Estates of Commands
2.       Joint Directors, Defence Estates          Rs. 2.5 lakhs per case
         of the Commands
3.       DEOs                                      Rs. 50,000 per case
                                    81
    6. The amount so sanctioned in each case will be deposited by the
concerned DEO with the Deputy Commissioner concerned. The DC will
make the payment of compensation to concerned individual(s) in the
presence of Local Military Officials so nominated by GOC-in-C/Corps
Commander, after verification of all facts about the individual concerned.
The DC will furnish payees receipts in duplicate immediately to DEO.
Each payment to the DC would be audited with reference to the land
details and rates of crop compensation as given by the Revenue
Authorities, by the unit accountants attached to the DEOs office. Any ex-
gratia amount towards the damages to the crops, received by the farmers
from any other Govt. agency/department would be deducted by the
revenue authorities before making the payment as sanctioned by the
competent authorities in the Ministry of Defence.
    7. However, the cases where the damages so assessed by the local
revenue authorities are not accepted by the Competent Military
Authorities, will be referred to Ministry of Defence for decision. The
cases involving payment exceeding the limits as indicated in para 5
above will also be referred to Ministry of Defence for consideration/
approval.
    8. In cases where the occupation of land is longer than 30 days,
the owners of lands would be entitled to rental compensation as
regulated in terms of Ministry of Defence letter No. 11011/2/77/
D(Lands) dated 12.10.1977 and amendments made thereto.
   9. The expenditure involved will be debitable to Major Head 2076,
Minor Head 111, Sub-Head D (b), General Charges (Code Head 486/01).
    10. This issues with the concurrence of Ministry of Defence (Finance
Division) vide their U.O. No. 613/Fin./QB/02 dated 18.3.2002.

                                                         Yours faithfully,

                                                                  Sd/-
                                                           (A.K. Pathak)
                                                        Director (Works)
Copy to:
  1. The Chief of Army Staff, New Delhi.
  2. The Director General Defence Estates, New Delhi—5 copies.
  3. QMG’s Branch/Q3L (Policy)—5 copies.
  4. The Comptroller and Auditor General of India, New Delhi.
  5. DFA (GS)
  6. Ministry of Defence (Finance Division/W.I.).
  7. DFA (Budget).
  8. DGADS, New Delhi.
  9. The Chief Controller of Defence Accounts, Northern, Southern
     and Western Commands.
 10. Finance Division/QB.
                              APPENDIX I

    MINUTES OF FORTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING
           COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-2007)

    The Commiteee sat on Friday, the 27th July, 2007 from 1100 to
1200 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.

                               PRESENT
       Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —     Chairman
                                 MEMBERS
                               Lok Sabha

    2. Shri Milind Deora
    3. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
    4. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
    5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
    6. Dr. K.S. Manoj
    7. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
    8. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
    9. Shri Shriniwas Patil
   10. Shri Raju Rana
    11. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
   12. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
   13. Shri Manavendra Singh
   14. Shri Rajesh Verma

                               Rajya Sabha

   15. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
   16. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
   17. Smt. N.P. Durga
   18. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
   19. Shri K.B. Shanappa
   20. Shri Arun Shourie

                                   82
                                     83

                                SECRETARIAT

        1. Shri P.K. Bhandari             —   Joint Secretary
        2. Shri Gopal Singh               —   Director
        3. Shri D.R. Shekhar              —   Deputy Secretary-II
        4. Smt. Jyocharamayi Sinha        —   Under Secretary

     2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee, then took up for
consideration/adoption of the draft Report on Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations/observations of the Committee
contained in their Thirteenth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on ‘A Critical
Review of Rehabilitation of Displaced Persons’.

    3. The Members of the Committee felt that the Action Taken replies
submitted by the Ministry in response to the recommendations
contained in the Thirteenth report on the subject ‘A Critical Review of
Rehabilitation of Displaced Persons’ were not satisfactory, and needed
more clarifications on the replies. The Committee expressed their
unhappiness over Action Taken reply submitted by the Ministry of
Defence. The Committee, therefore, decided that the representatives of
the Ministry of Defence as well as the Ministry of Rural Development
might be called before the Committee to have clarifications on certain
points arising out of the said replies and the draft Action Taken report
be further modified accordingly.

                     The Committee then adjourned.
   MINUTES OF FORTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING
           COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-2007)

    The Commitee sat on Friday, the 3rd August, 2007 from 1100 to
1250 hrs. in Room No. G-074, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.

                                PRESENT

       Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —      Chairman

                                 MEMBERS

                                Lok Sabha

     2. Shri Milind Deora
     3. Shri Santosh Gangwar
     4. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
     5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
     6. Dr. K.S. Manoj
     7. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
     8. Shri Shriniwas Patil
     9. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
    10. Shri Manavendra Singh
    11. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

                                Rajya Sabha

    12. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
    13. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
    14. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
    15. Shri K.B. Shanappa
    16. Smt. Viplove Thakur

                                SECRETARIAT

       1. Shri P. K. Bhandari            —    Joint Secretary
       2. Shri Gopal Singh               —    Director
       3. Shri D.R. Shekhar              —    Deputy Secretary-II
       4. Smt. Jyocharamayi Sinha        —    Under Secretary
                                    84
                                   85

                                WITNESS

               Representatives of Ministry of Defence

     1. Shri Vijay Singh                —   Defence Secretary
     2. Shri K.P. Singh                 —   Secretary (DP)
     3. Shri M. Natarajan               —   SA to RM, Secretary Defence
                                            R&D
     4. Ms. Neelam Nath                 —   Addl. Secretary (N)
     5. Shri C.R. Mohapatra             —   DGDE
     6. Shri G. Elangovan               —   CCRD&D (R&M)
     7. Shri Sudipta Ghosh              —   DGOF & Chairman/OFB
     8. Shri Anand Mishra               —   JS (C&W)
     9. Shri V. Somasundaran            —   JS (OF)
    10. Radm. A.R. Radhakrishnan        —   DG Project Seabird
    11. Shri Ashok Harnal               —   Addl.     Director    General,
                                            DGDE
    12. Shri K.N. Rai                   —   Chief Executive (CW&E)
    13. Brig. Rajeev Datt               —   DDGPPE
    14. Air Cmdr. D.S. Bisht            —   PD, AFW
    15. Captain Rakesh Raman            —   GM (F&K)
    16. Cdr. S. Karsolia                —   PDSSD (AOD)

     2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee and sought
clarifications on certain points arising out of the Action Taken Replies
submitted by the Ministry on recommendations/observations of
Committee contained in the 13th Report of the Committee on ‘A Critical
Review of Rehabilitation of Displaced Persons’ and drew their attention
to Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding
maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting of the
Committee.

    3. The Committee then sought clarifications on the issues inter-alia,
the difficulties being faced by the Ministry for providing better
rehabilitation package, the status of the cases pending in the courts
relating to resettlement and rehabilitation, the reason for non-
implementation of the NPRR-2003 to the projects executed earlier to
2004, efforts made by the Ministry to share responsibility with State
Governments to coordinate and monitor the progress of rehabilitation,
                                    86

justification for acquiring vast track of land for defence purposes, study
undertaken by the Ministry for the use of already acquired land and
compensation to be paid to the affected families whose cattle died
during exercise/operation undertaken by the forces.

    4. The Committee also desired that status report on Resettlement
& Rehabilitation problems related to Ministry of Defence projects Sea-
Bird in Karnataka should be provided to the Committee within a week.
The Committee further desired that they should be apprised of the
mechanism for acquiring land for defence purposes. The Committee
was also impressed by the Ministry on essential representation/
involvement of concerned command during the implementation of
Resettlement and Rehabilitation scheme.

   5. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence clarified the
queries raised by the Members one by one.

                       The witnesses then withdrew.

    6. The verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

        The Committee then adjourned to meet again at 1400 hrs.
                            on the same day.
    MINUTES OF FORTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
           COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-2007)

    The Commitee sat on Friday, the 3rd August 2007 from 1400 to
1505 hrs. in Room No. G-074, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.

                                PRESENT

       Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —      Chairman

                                 MEMBERS

                                Lok Sabha

     2. Shri Milind Deora
     3. Shri Santosh Gangwar
     4. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
     5. Dr. K.S. Manoj
     6. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
     7. Shri Shriniwas Patil
     8. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
     9. Shri Manavendra Singh
    10. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni

                                Rajya Sabha

    11. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
    12. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
    13. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
    14. Shri K.B. Shanappa
    15. Smt. Viplove Thakur

                                SECRETARIAT

       1. Shri P.K. Bhandari             —    Joint Secretary
       2. Shri Gopal Singh               —    Director
       3. Shri D.R. Shekhar              —    Deputy Secretary-II
       4. Smt. Jyocharamayi Sinha        —    Under Secretary
                                    87
                                     88

                                  WITNESS

       Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development

     1. Dr. Subas Pani                —     Secretary (RD)
     2. Shri Bhaskar Chatterjee       —     Additional Secretary (LR)
     3. Shri A.K. Singh               —     Director (LR)

     2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives
of the Ministry of Rural Development to the sitting of the Committee to
tender Oral evidence on the subject ‘A Critical Review of Rehabilitation
of Displaced Persons’ and drew their attention to Direction 58 of
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining
confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting of the Committee.

     3. The Committee then requested the representatives to brief the
Committee on certain issues viz., the present status of revised National
Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation (NPRR), and draft Bill on
Land Acquisition, important changes and improvement made therein,
the time frame fixed for their enforcement, response received from the
States/U.Ts thereon, and efforts made by the Ministry to give legislative
shape to the rehabilitation policy etc.

     4. The representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
apprised the Committee that they were in broad agreement with almost
all the recommendations of the Committee given in their 13th Report
and these were factored to incorporate in the proposed NPRR-2007.

     5. He further briefed the Committee that the scope of the policy
was enhanced to include all people who were affected by involuntary
displacement. This policy also has special prvoisions for tribal people
like access to forest areas etc., preparation of social impact assessment
in which the public hearing would be made mandatory, consultations
with Gram Sabha, housing benefits to the affected families, etc. On
the out of court settlement issue, he informed the Committee that
though it was not included in the draft resettlement and rehabilitation
policy but the issue would be placed before the Group of Ministers.

   6. The Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development then briefed the
Committee that the Rehabilitation Policy, 2007, a Bill to give a legislative
shape to the policy and the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill are
under consideration of the GoM and the concern expressed by the
Committee would be brought forward for their consideration.
                                     89

    7. The representatives of the Ministry then clarified all the points
raised by the Members one-by-one.

                       The witnesses then withdrew.

    8. The verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

                      The Committee then adjourned.
    MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING
            COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2007-2008)

   The Commitee sat on Thursday, the 6th September 2007 from
1600 to 1650 hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.

                                PRESENT

       Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —      Chairman

                                 MEMBERS

                                Lok Sabha

     2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
     3. Shri Milind Deora
     4. Shri Santosh Gangwar
     5. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
     6. Dr. K.S. Manoj
     7. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
     8. Shri Manavendra Singh

                               Rajya Sabha

     9. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
    10. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
    11. Smt. N.P. Durga
    12. Shri K.B. Shanappa
    13. Smt. Viplove Thakur

                                SECRETARIAT

       1. Shri P.K. Bhandari         —        Joint Secretary
       2. Shri Gopal Singh           —        Director
       3. Shri D.R. Shekhar          —        Deputy Secretary-II

                                   90
                                  91

     2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee, thereafter, considered the
draft report on the ‘Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Thirteenth Report of
the Committee on ‘A Critical Review of Rehabilitation of Displaced
Persons’ and adopted the same with some additions/modifications as
suggested by the Members.

    3. The Committee then authorised the Hon’ble Chairman to finalise
the report and present the same to the Parliament.

                    The Committee then adjourned.
 MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
           COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2007-2008)

    The Committee sat on Monday, the 3rd March, 2008 from
1600 to 1715 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.

                                 PRESENT

       Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —       Chairman

                                  MEMBERS

                                 Lok Sabha

    2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
    3. Shri S. Bangarappa
    4. Shri Santosh Gangwar
    5. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
    6. Shri C. Kuppusami
    7. Dr. K.S. Manoj
    8. Shri Manavendra Singh

                              Rajya Sabha

    9. Shri K.B. Shanappa

                                 SECRETARIAT

       1. Shri S.K. Sharma                —    Additional Secretary
       2. Shri A. Louis Martin            —    Joint Secretary
       3. Shri Gopal Singh                —    Director
       4. Shri D.R. Shekhar               —    Deputy Secretary-II
       5. Smt. Jyocharamayi Sinha         —    Under Secretary

           Representatives of the Ministry of Defence

    1. Shri P.K. Rastogi                  —    Special Secretary
    2. Smt. Neelam Nath                   —    Additional Secretary
    3. Shri G. Elangovan                  —    CCR&D (R&M)
    4. Shri Anand Mishra                  —    Joint Secretary
                                     92
                                    93

     5. Shri Balsharan Singh             — DGDE
     6. Shri Ashok Harnal                — Additional DGDE
     7. Shri K.N. Rai                    — Advisor (SP)
     8. Dr. J.P. Singh                   — Additional Director
     9. V. Adml. D.K. Dewan              — COP
    10. V. Adml. S.K. Sinha              — CPS
    11. Air Mshl. V.K. Verma             — DG (I&S)
    12. Air Mshl. J.N. Burma             — AOA
    13. Maj. Gen. A.K. Rao               — DG (MP&PS)
    14. Maj. Gen. B.V. Nair              — ADG (C&W)
    15. R. Adml. A.R. Radhakrishnan      — DG (Seabird)
    16. Cmde. K. Surjit Singh            — PDESA
    17. Capt. Rakesh Raman               — GM (F&K)

       Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
                  (Department of Land Resources)

     1. Smt. Rita Sinha                  — Secretary
     2. Dr. A.K. Singh                   — Director

    2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Rural Development to give
oral evidence on the Rehabilitation Policy and drew their attention to
the Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding
maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting.

    3. The representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
through a power point presentation briefed the Committee about the
present status, scope and salient features of the National Rehabilitation
Policy, 2007 and other associated legislative measures. The Secretary,
Rural Development, highlighted the new aspects covered in the
proposed Bill also on Rehabilitation Policy, recently introduced in the
House to give legal effect to the National Rehabilitation Policy (NRP),
2007.

    4. The Committee then raised several issues     viz. difficulties being
faced by the Ministry of Defence while providing better rehabilitation
and resettlement packages to the displaced persons at par with those
provided by the Public Sector Undertakings/Departments/Ministries
and State Governments, action taken by the Ministry of Defence in
solving the 40 years old rehabilitation problem at National Defence
                                   94

Academy (NDA), Khadkvasla, possibilities for retrospective application
of the NPRR, 2007 for resolving old cases, number of cases pending
in Supreme Court, High Courts and other Courts, number of cases the
Ministry of Defence are fighting at various stages and measures taken
by the Ministry of Defence to solve the cases through negotiations
and reconciliation, provision in NPRR, 2007 in regard to payment of
compensation for acquired grazing land, clarifications on definition of
‘Public Purpose’ and monitoring of progress of rehabilitation/
resettlement by the Ministry of Defence etc.

   5. The represnetatives of the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of
Rural Development clarified the points raised by the Members.

    6. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting have been kept.

    7. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the draft
report already adopted by the Committee in the light of further
discussion and consequential changes for its presentation to the
Parliament.

                     The Committee then adjourned.
                                 APPENDIX II

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
 THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 13th REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (FOURTEENTH
 LOK SABHA) ON ‘A CRITICAL REVIEW OF REHABILITATION
                 OF DISPLACED PERSONS’

                                                             Percentage
                                                                of Total

(i)     Total number of recommendations                      57

(ii)    Recommendations/Observations which have              15    26%
        been accepted by the Government:
        (Para Nos. 1.12, 1.14, 2.14, 2.18, 2.38, 2.53,
        2.54, 3.8, 3.9, 3.19, 3.20, 3.34, 3.35, 3.52
        and 3.69)

(iii)   Recommendations/Observations which the
        Committee do not desire to pursue in
        view of Government replies:                           1     2%
        (Para No. 3.90)

(iv)    Recommendations/Observations in respect              36    63%
        of which replies of the Government have
        not been accepted by the Committee:
        (Para Nos. 1.7, 1.8, 1.10, 1.11, 1.13, 2.11, 2.24,
        2.34 to 2.37, 2.59, 2.60, 2.63, 2.66, 2.73, 2.84,
        2.85, 2.86, 2.91, 2.92, 2.104 to 2.107, 3.14,
        3.15, 3.51, 3.61 to 3.64, , 3.75, 3.76,
        3.85 and 3.86)

(v)     Recommendations/Observations in respect               5     9%
        of which final replies of Government are
        still awaited:
        (Para Nos. 1.9, 1.15, 2.12, 3.38 and 3.42)




                                        95
